components/camel-ibm/camel-ibm-cos/src/main/docs/ibm-cos-component.adoc, before:

= IBM Cloud Object Storage Component
:doctitle: IBM Cloud Object Storage
:shortname: ibm-cos
:artifactid: camel-ibm-cos
:description: Store and retrieve objects from IBM Cloud Object Storage.
:since: 4.16
:supportlevel: Preview
:tabs-sync-option:
:component-header: Both producer and consumer are supported
//Manually maintained attributes
:group: IBM
:camel-spring-boot-name: ibm-cos

*Since Camel {since}*

*{component-header}*

The IBM COS component supports storing and retrieving objects from/to
https://www.ibm.com/cloud/object-storage[IBM Cloud Object Storage].

Prerequisites

You must have a valid IBM Cloud account, and be signed up to use IBM Cloud Object Storage.
More information is available at https://www.ibm.com/cloud/object-storage[IBM Cloud Object Storage].

== URI Format

------------------------------
ibm-cos://bucketName[?options]
------------------------------

The bucket will be created if it doesn't already exist.

You can append query options to the URI in the following format:

`?options=value&option2=value&...`


// component options: START
include::partial$component-configure-options.adoc[]
include::partial$component-endpoint-options.adoc[]
include::partial$component-endpoint-headers.adoc[]
// component options: END


Required IBM COS component options

You have to provide the `apiKey` and `serviceInstanceId` to access IBM Cloud Object Storage,
along with the `endpointUrl` for your region.

== Usage

=== Batch Consumer

This component implements the Batch Consumer.

This allows you, for instance, to know how many messages exist in this
batch and for instance, let the Aggregator
aggregate this number of messages.

=== IBM COS Producer operations

The IBM COS component provides the following operation on the producer side:

- copyObject
- createBucket
- deleteBucket
- deleteObject
- deleteObjects
- getObject (this will return an InputStream)
- getObjectRange (this will return an InputStream with partial content)
- headBucket
- listBuckets
- listObjects
- putObject

If you don't specify an operation explicitly, the producer will do:

- a single file upload
- a multipart upload if multiPartUpload option is enabled

== Examples

For example, to read file `hello.txt` from bucket `helloBucket`, use the following snippet:

[source,java]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
from("ibm-cos://helloBucket?apiKey=yourApiKey&serviceInstanceId=yourServiceInstanceId&endpointUrl=https://s3.us-south.cloud-object-storage.appdomain.cloud&prefix=hello.txt")
  .to("file:/var/downloaded");
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

=== Advanced IBM COS Client configuration

If your Camel Application is running behind a firewall or if you need to
have more control over the `AmazonS3` client instance configuration, you can
create your own instance and refer to it in your Camel ibm-cos component configuration:

[source,java]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
from("ibm-cos://MyBucket?cosClient=#client&delay=5000&maxMessagesPerPoll=5")
.to("mock:result");
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

=== IBM COS Authentication

IBM Cloud Object Storage uses IBM Cloud IAM (Identity and Access Management) for authentication.
You need to provide:

- `apiKey`: Your IBM Cloud API key
- `serviceInstanceId`: Your COS service instance ID (CRN - Cloud Resource Name)
- `endpointUrl`: The endpoint URL for your region (e.g., `https://s3.us-south.cloud-object-storage.appdomain.cloud`)

You can find your service instance ID and create API keys in the IBM Cloud console.

For more information about IBM COS authentication, see the
https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/cloud-object-storage?topic=cloud-object-storage-iam[IBM COS IAM documentation].

=== IBM COS Endpoints

IBM COS provides different endpoints for different regions and access types (public, private, direct).
Examples:

- Public endpoint (US South): `https://s3.us-south.cloud-object-storage.appdomain.cloud`
- Public endpoint (EU GB): `https://s3.eu-gb.cloud-object-storage.appdomain.cloud`
- Private endpoint (US South): `https://s3.private.us-south.cloud-object-storage.appdomain.cloud`

For a complete list of endpoints, see
https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/cloud-object-storage?topic=cloud-object-storage-endpoints[IBM COS Endpoints documentation].

=== IBM COS Producer Operation examples

- Single Upload: This operation will upload a file to IBM COS based on the body content

[source,java]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  from("direct:start").process(new Processor() {

      @Override
      public void process(Exchange exchange) throws Exception {
          exchange.getIn().setHeader(IBMCOSConstants.KEY, "camel.txt");
          exchange.getIn().setBody("Camel rocks!");
      }
  })
  .to("ibm-cos://mycamelbucket?apiKey=RAW(myApiKey)&serviceInstanceId=RAW(myServiceInstanceId)&endpointUrl=https://s3.us-south.cloud-object-storage.appdomain.cloud")
  .to("mock:result");
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This operation will upload the file camel.txt with the content "Camel rocks!" in the _mycamelbucket_ bucket.

NOTE: Use `RAW()` wrapper for sensitive values like API keys to prevent property placeholder resolution.

- Multipart Upload: This operation will perform a multipart upload of a file to IBM COS based on the body content

[source,java]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  from("direct:start").process(new Processor() {

      @Override
      public void process(Exchange exchange) throws Exception {
          exchange.getIn().setHeader(IBMCOSConstants.KEY, "largefile.zip");
          exchange.getIn().setBody(new File("src/largefile.zip"));
      }
  })
  .to("ibm-cos://mycamelbucket?cosClient=#cosClient&multiPartUpload=true&partSize=5242880")
  .to("mock:result");
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This operation will perform a multipart upload of the file largefile.zip in the _mycamelbucket_ bucket with a part size of 5MB.

- CopyObject: this operation copies an object from one bucket to a different one

[source,java]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  from("direct:start").process(new Processor() {

      @Override
      public void process(Exchange exchange) throws Exception {
          exchange.getIn().setHeader(IBMCOSConstants.BUCKET_DESTINATION_NAME, "camelDestinationBucket");
          exchange.getIn().setHeader(IBMCOSConstants.KEY, "camelKey");
          exchange.getIn().setHeader(IBMCOSConstants.DESTINATION_KEY, "camelDestinationKey");
      }
  })
  .to("ibm-cos://mycamelbucket?cosClient=#cosClient&operation=copyObject")
  .to("mock:result");
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This operation will copy the object with the name expressed in the header camelKey to camelDestinationKey in the camelDestinationBucket bucket, from the bucket _mycamelbucket_.

- DeleteObject: this operation deletes an object from a bucket

[source,java]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  from("direct:start").process(new Processor() {

      @Override
      public void process(Exchange exchange) throws Exception {
          exchange.getIn().setHeader(IBMCOSConstants.KEY, "camelKey");
      }
  })
  .to("ibm-cos://mycamelbucket?cosClient=#cosClient&operation=deleteObject")
  .to("mock:result");
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This operation will delete the object camelKey from the bucket _mycamelbucket_.

- DeleteObjects: this operation deletes multiple objects from a bucket in a single request

[source,java]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  from("direct:start").process(new Processor() {

      @Override
      public void process(Exchange exchange) throws Exception {
          List<String> keys = Arrays.asList("file1.txt", "file2.txt", "file3.txt");
          exchange.getIn().setHeader(IBMCOSConstants.KEYS_TO_DELETE, keys);
      }
  })
  .to("ibm-cos://mycamelbucket?cosClient=#cosClient&operation=deleteObjects")
  .to("mock:result");
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This operation will delete the objects file1.txt, file2.txt, and file3.txt from the bucket _mycamelbucket_ in a single batch request.

- ListBuckets: this operation lists the buckets for this account in this region

[source,java]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  from("direct:start")
  .to("ibm-cos://mycamelbucket?cosClient=#cosClient&operation=listBuckets")
  .to("mock:result");
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This operation will list the buckets for this account.

- DeleteBucket: this operation deletes the bucket specified as URI parameter or header

[source,java]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  from("direct:start")
  .to("ibm-cos://mycamelbucket?cosClient=#cosClient&operation=deleteBucket")
  .to("mock:result");
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This operation will delete the bucket _mycamelbucket_.

- CreateBucket: this operation creates a new bucket

[source,java]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  from("direct:start").process(new Processor() {

      @Override
      public void process(Exchange exchange) throws Exception {
          exchange.getIn().setHeader(IBMCOSConstants.BUCKET_NAME, "newBucket");
      }
  })
  .to("ibm-cos://mycamelbucket?cosClient=#cosClient&operation=createBucket")
  .to("mock:result");
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This operation will create a new bucket named _newBucket_.

- ListObjects: this operation lists objects in a specific bucket

[source,java]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  from("direct:start")
  .to("ibm-cos://mycamelbucket?cosClient=#cosClient&operation=listObjects")
  .to("mock:result");
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This operation will list the objects in the _mycamelbucket_ bucket.

- ListObjects with prefix: this operation lists objects in a specific bucket with a prefix filter

[source,java]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  from("direct:start").process(new Processor() {

      @Override
      public void process(Exchange exchange) throws Exception {
          exchange.getIn().setHeader(IBMCOSConstants.PREFIX, "backup/");
      }
  })
  .to("ibm-cos://mycamelbucket?cosClient=#cosClient&operation=listObjects")
  .to("mock:result");
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This operation will list only the objects in the _mycamelbucket_ bucket that start with "backup/".

- GetObject: this operation gets a single object in a specific bucket

[source,java]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  from("direct:start").process(new Processor() {

      @Override
      public void process(Exchange exchange) throws Exception {
          exchange.getIn().setHeader(IBMCOSConstants.KEY, "camelKey");
      }
  })
  .to("ibm-cos://mycamelbucket?cosClient=#cosClient&operation=getObject")
  .to("mock:result");
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This operation will return an InputStream with the content of the camelKey object in _mycamelbucket_ bucket.

- GetObjectRange: this operation gets a single object range in a specific bucket

[source,java]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  from("direct:start").process(new Processor() {

      @Override
      public void process(Exchange exchange) throws Exception {
          exchange.getIn().setHeader(IBMCOSConstants.KEY, "camelKey");
          exchange.getIn().setHeader(IBMCOSConstants.RANGE_START, 0L);
          exchange.getIn().setHeader(IBMCOSConstants.RANGE_END, 9L);
      }
  })
  .to("ibm-cos://mycamelbucket?cosClient=#cosClient&operation=getObjectRange")
  .to("mock:result");
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This operation will return an InputStream with the content of the camelKey object in _mycamelbucket_ bucket, containing bytes from 0 to 9.

- HeadBucket: this operation checks if a bucket exists and you have permission to access it

[source,java]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  from("direct:start")
  .to("ibm-cos://mycamelbucket?cosClient=#cosClient&operation=headBucket")
  .to("mock:result");
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This operation will check if the bucket _mycamelbucket_ exists and is accessible. The result (true/false) will be in the message body.

=== IBM COS Consumer

The IBM COS consumer will poll a bucket for new objects and process them.

[source,java]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
from("ibm-cos://mycamelbucket?cosClient=#cosClient&delay=5000&maxMessagesPerPoll=10&deleteAfterRead=true")
  .to("file:/var/downloaded");
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This route will poll the _mycamelbucket_ bucket every 5 seconds, processing up to 10 objects per poll, and deleting each object after it's been successfully processed.

=== Move After Read

Instead of deleting objects after reading, you can move them to a different bucket or prefix:

[source,java]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
from("ibm-cos://mycamelbucket?cosClient=#cosClient&deleteAfterRead=false&moveAfterRead=true&destinationBucket=processed-bucket&destinationBucketPrefix=done-")
  .to("direct:process");
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This route will move processed objects from _mycamelbucket_ to _processed-bucket_, prefixing each object key with "done-".

=== IBM COS Consumer with prefix filter

You can filter which objects to consume by using a prefix:

[source,java]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
from("ibm-cos://mycamelbucket?cosClient=#cosClient&prefix=inbox/&deleteAfterRead=true")
  .to("direct:process");
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This route will only consume objects whose keys start with "inbox/".

== Dependencies

Maven users will need to add the following dependency to their `pom.xml`.

*pom.xml*

[source,xml]
---------------------------------------
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.apache.camel</groupId>
    <artifactId>camel-ibm-cos</artifactId>
    <version>x.x.x</version>
    <!-- use the same version as your Camel core version -->
</dependency>
---------------------------------------

where `x.x.x` is the version number of Camel.

include::spring-boot:partial$starter.adoc[]

Commit message:

Improve documentation for IBM Cloud Object Storage related to endpoint (#20191)
Signed-off-by: Aurélien Pupier <apupier@ibm.com>

components/camel-ibm/camel-ibm-cos/src/main/docs/ibm-cos-component.adoc, after:

= IBM Cloud Object Storage Component
:doctitle: IBM Cloud Object Storage
:shortname: ibm-cos
:artifactid: camel-ibm-cos
:description: Store and retrieve objects from IBM Cloud Object Storage.
:since: 4.16
:supportlevel: Preview
:tabs-sync-option:
:component-header: Both producer and consumer are supported
//Manually maintained attributes
:group: IBM
:camel-spring-boot-name: ibm-cos

*Since Camel {since}*

*{component-header}*

The IBM COS component supports storing and retrieving objects from/to
https://www.ibm.com/cloud/object-storage[IBM Cloud Object Storage].

Prerequisites

You must have a valid IBM Cloud account, and be signed up to use IBM Cloud Object Storage.
More information is available at https://www.ibm.com/cloud/object-storage[IBM Cloud Object Storage].

== URI Format

------------------------------
ibm-cos://bucketName[?options]
------------------------------

The bucket will be created if it doesn't already exist.

You can append query options to the URI in the following format:

`?options=value&option2=value&...`


// component options: START
include::partial$component-configure-options.adoc[]
include::partial$component-endpoint-options.adoc[]
include::partial$component-endpoint-headers.adoc[]
// component options: END


Required IBM COS component options

You have to provide the `apiKey` and `serviceInstanceId` to access IBM Cloud Object Storage,
along with the `endpointUrl` for your region.

== Usage

=== Batch Consumer

This component implements the Batch Consumer.

This allows you, for instance, to know how many messages exist in this
batch and for instance, let the Aggregator
aggregate this number of messages.

=== IBM COS Producer operations

The IBM COS component provides the following operation on the producer side:

- copyObject
- createBucket
- deleteBucket
- deleteObject
- deleteObjects
- getObject (this will return an InputStream)
- getObjectRange (this will return an InputStream with partial content)
- headBucket
- listBuckets
- listObjects
- putObject

If you don't specify an operation explicitly, the producer will do:

- a single file upload
- a multipart upload if multiPartUpload option is enabled

== Examples

For example, to read file `hello.txt` from bucket `helloBucket`, use the following snippet:

[source,java]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
from("ibm-cos://helloBucket?apiKey=yourApiKey&serviceInstanceId=yourServiceInstanceId&endpointUrl=https://s3.us-south.cloud-object-storage.appdomain.cloud&prefix=hello.txt")
  .to("file:/var/downloaded");
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

=== Advanced IBM COS Client configuration

If your Camel Application is running behind a firewall or if you need to
have more control over the `AmazonS3` client instance configuration, you can
create your own instance and refer to it in your Camel ibm-cos component configuration:

[source,java]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
from("ibm-cos://MyBucket?cosClient=#client&delay=5000&maxMessagesPerPoll=5")
.to("mock:result");
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

=== IBM COS Authentication

IBM Cloud Object Storage uses IBM Cloud IAM (Identity and Access Management) for authentication.
You need to provide:

- `apiKey`: Your IBM Cloud API key
- `serviceInstanceId`: Your COS service instance ID (CRN - Cloud Resource Name)
- `endpointUrl`: The endpoint URL for your region (e.g., `https://s3.us-south.cloud-object-storage.appdomain.cloud`)

You can find your service instance ID and create API keys in the IBM Cloud console.

For more information about IBM COS authentication, see the
https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/cloud-object-storage?topic=cloud-object-storage-iam[IBM COS IAM documentation].

=== IBM COS Endpoints

IBM COS provides different endpoints for different regions and access types (public, private, direct).
Examples:

- Public endpoint (US South): `https://s3.us-south.cloud-object-storage.appdomain.cloud`
- Public endpoint (EU GB): `https://s3.eu-gb.cloud-object-storage.appdomain.cloud`
- Private endpoint (US South): `https://s3.private.us-south.cloud-object-storage.appdomain.cloud`

For a complete list of endpoints, see
https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/cloud-object-storage?topic=cloud-object-storage-endpoints[IBM COS Endpoints documentation].

Note that several operations requires a regional endpoint, as opposed to a cross-region endpoint.

=== IBM COS Producer Operation examples

- Single Upload: This operation will upload a file to IBM COS based on the body content

[source,java]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  from("direct:start").process(new Processor() {

      @Override
      public void process(Exchange exchange) throws Exception {
          exchange.getIn().setHeader(IBMCOSConstants.KEY, "camel.txt");
          exchange.getIn().setBody("Camel rocks!");
      }
  })
  .to("ibm-cos://mycamelbucket?apiKey=RAW(myApiKey)&serviceInstanceId=RAW(myServiceInstanceId)&endpointUrl=https://s3.us-south.cloud-object-storage.appdomain.cloud")
  .to("mock:result");
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This operation will upload the file camel.txt with the content "Camel rocks!" in the _mycamelbucket_ bucket.

NOTE: Use `RAW()` wrapper for sensitive values like API keys to prevent property placeholder resolution.

- Multipart Upload: This operation will perform a multipart upload of a file to IBM COS based on the body content

[source,java]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  from("direct:start").process(new Processor() {

      @Override
      public void process(Exchange exchange) throws Exception {
          exchange.getIn().setHeader(IBMCOSConstants.KEY, "largefile.zip");
          exchange.getIn().setBody(new File("src/largefile.zip"));
      }
  })
  .to("ibm-cos://mycamelbucket?cosClient=#cosClient&multiPartUpload=true&partSize=5242880")
  .to("mock:result");
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This operation will perform a multipart upload of the file largefile.zip in the _mycamelbucket_ bucket with a part size of 5MB.

- CopyObject: this operation copies an object from one bucket to a different one

[source,java]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  from("direct:start").process(new Processor() {

      @Override
      public void process(Exchange exchange) throws Exception {
          exchange.getIn().setHeader(IBMCOSConstants.BUCKET_DESTINATION_NAME, "camelDestinationBucket");
          exchange.getIn().setHeader(IBMCOSConstants.KEY, "camelKey");
          exchange.getIn().setHeader(IBMCOSConstants.DESTINATION_KEY, "camelDestinationKey");
      }
  })
  .to("ibm-cos://mycamelbucket?cosClient=#cosClient&operation=copyObject")
  .to("mock:result");
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This operation will copy the object with the name expressed in the header camelKey to camelDestinationKey in the camelDestinationBucket bucket, from the bucket _mycamelbucket_.

- DeleteObject: this operation deletes an object from a bucket

[source,java]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  from("direct:start").process(new Processor() {

      @Override
      public void process(Exchange exchange) throws Exception {
          exchange.getIn().setHeader(IBMCOSConstants.KEY, "camelKey");
      }
  })
  .to("ibm-cos://mycamelbucket?cosClient=#cosClient&operation=deleteObject")
  .to("mock:result");
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This operation will delete the object camelKey from the bucket _mycamelbucket_.

- DeleteObjects: this operation deletes multiple objects from a bucket in a single request

[source,java]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  from("direct:start").process(new Processor() {

      @Override
      public void process(Exchange exchange) throws Exception {
          List<String> keys = Arrays.asList("file1.txt", "file2.txt", "file3.txt");
          exchange.getIn().setHeader(IBMCOSConstants.KEYS_TO_DELETE, keys);
      }
  })
  .to("ibm-cos://mycamelbucket?cosClient=#cosClient&operation=deleteObjects")
  .to("mock:result");
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This operation will delete the objects file1.txt, file2.txt, and file3.txt from the bucket _mycamelbucket_ in a single batch request.

- ListBuckets: this operation lists the buckets for this account in this region

[source,java]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  from("direct:start")
  .to("ibm-cos://mycamelbucket?cosClient=#cosClient&operation=listBuckets")
  .to("mock:result");
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This operation will list the buckets for this account.

- DeleteBucket: this operation deletes the bucket specified as URI parameter or header

[source,java]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  from("direct:start")
  .to("ibm-cos://mycamelbucket?cosClient=#cosClient&operation=deleteBucket")
  .to("mock:result");
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This operation will delete the bucket _mycamelbucket_.

- CreateBucket: this operation creates a new bucket

[source,java]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  from("direct:start").process(new Processor() {

      @Override
      public void process(Exchange exchange) throws Exception {
          exchange.getIn().setHeader(IBMCOSConstants.BUCKET_NAME, "newBucket");
      }
  })
  .to("ibm-cos://mycamelbucket?cosClient=#cosClient&operation=createBucket")
  .to("mock:result");
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This operation will create a new bucket named _newBucket_.

- ListObjects: this operation lists objects in a specific bucket

[source,java]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  from("direct:start")
  .to("ibm-cos://mycamelbucket?cosClient=#cosClient&operation=listObjects")
  .to("mock:result");
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This operation will list the objects in the _mycamelbucket_ bucket.

- ListObjects with prefix: this operation lists objects in a specific bucket with a prefix filter

[source,java]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  from("direct:start").process(new Processor() {

      @Override
      public void process(Exchange exchange) throws Exception {
          exchange.getIn().setHeader(IBMCOSConstants.PREFIX, "backup/");
      }
  })
  .to("ibm-cos://mycamelbucket?cosClient=#cosClient&operation=listObjects")
  .to("mock:result");
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This operation will list only the objects in the _mycamelbucket_ bucket that start with "backup/".

- GetObject: this operation gets a single object in a specific bucket

[source,java]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  from("direct:start").process(new Processor() {

      @Override
      public void process(Exchange exchange) throws Exception {
          exchange.getIn().setHeader(IBMCOSConstants.KEY, "camelKey");
      }
  })
  .to("ibm-cos://mycamelbucket?cosClient=#cosClient&operation=getObject")
  .to("mock:result");
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This operation will return an InputStream with the content of the camelKey object in _mycamelbucket_ bucket.

- GetObjectRange: this operation gets a single object range in a specific bucket

[source,java]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  from("direct:start").process(new Processor() {

      @Override
      public void process(Exchange exchange) throws Exception {
          exchange.getIn().setHeader(IBMCOSConstants.KEY, "camelKey");
          exchange.getIn().setHeader(IBMCOSConstants.RANGE_START, 0L);
          exchange.getIn().setHeader(IBMCOSConstants.RANGE_END, 9L);
      }
  })
  .to("ibm-cos://mycamelbucket?cosClient=#cosClient&operation=getObjectRange")
  .to("mock:result");
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This operation will return an InputStream with the content of the camelKey object in _mycamelbucket_ bucket, containing bytes from 0 to 9.

- HeadBucket: this operation checks if a bucket exists and you have permission to access it

[source,java]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  from("direct:start")
  .to("ibm-cos://mycamelbucket?cosClient=#cosClient&operation=headBucket")
  .to("mock:result");
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This operation will check if the bucket _mycamelbucket_ exists and is accessible. The result (true/false) will be in the message body.

=== IBM COS Consumer

The IBM COS consumer will poll a bucket for new objects and process them.

[source,java]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
from("ibm-cos://mycamelbucket?cosClient=#cosClient&delay=5000&maxMessagesPerPoll=10&deleteAfterRead=true")
  .to("file:/var/downloaded");
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This route will poll the _mycamelbucket_ bucket every 5 seconds, processing up to 10 objects per poll, and deleting each object after it's been successfully processed.

=== Move After Read

Instead of deleting objects after reading, you can move them to a different bucket or prefix:

[source,java]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
from("ibm-cos://mycamelbucket?cosClient=#cosClient&deleteAfterRead=false&moveAfterRead=true&destinationBucket=processed-bucket&destinationBucketPrefix=done-")
  .to("direct:process");
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This route will move processed objects from _mycamelbucket_ to _processed-bucket_, prefixing each object key with "done-".

=== IBM COS Consumer with prefix filter

You can filter which objects to consume by using a prefix:

[source,java]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
from("ibm-cos://mycamelbucket?cosClient=#cosClient&prefix=inbox/&deleteAfterRead=true")
  .to("direct:process");
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This route will only consume objects whose keys start with "inbox/".

== Dependencies

Maven users will need to add the following dependency to their `pom.xml`.

*pom.xml*

[source,xml]
---------------------------------------
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.apache.camel</groupId>
    <artifactId>camel-ibm-cos</artifactId>
    <version>x.x.x</version>
    <!-- use the same version as your Camel core version -->
</dependency>
---------------------------------------

where `x.x.x` is the version number of Camel.

include::spring-boot:partial$starter.adoc[]
