components/camel-telegram/src/main/docs/telegram-component.adoc, before:

= Telegram Component
:doctitle: Telegram
:shortname: telegram
:artifactid: camel-telegram
:description: Send and receive messages using the Telegram Bot API.
:since: 2.18
:supportlevel: Stable
:tabs-sync-option:
:component-header: Both producer and consumer are supported
//Manually maintained attributes
:camel-spring-boot-name: telegram

*Since Camel {since}*

*{component-header}*

The Telegram component provides access to the https://core.telegram.org/bots/api[Telegram Bot API].
It allows a Camel-based application to send and receive messages by acting as a Bot, participating in
direct conversations with normal users, private and public groups or channels.

A Telegram Bot must be created before using this component, following the instructions at the
https://core.telegram.org/bots#3-how-do-i-create-a-bot[Telegram Bot developers home].
When a new Bot is created, the https://telegram.me/botfather[BotFather] provides an
**authorization token** corresponding to the Bot. The authorization token is a mandatory parameter
for the camel-telegram endpoint.

[NOTE]
====
To allow the Bot to receive all messages exchanged within a group or channel (not just
the ones starting with a '/' character), ask the BotFather to *disable the privacy mode*, using the
*/setprivacy* command.
====


Maven users will need to add the following dependency to their `pom.xml`
for this component:

[source,xml]
------------------------------------------------------------
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.apache.camel</groupId>
    <artifactId>camel-telegram</artifactId>
    <version>x.x.x</version>
    <!-- use the same version as your Camel core version -->
</dependency>
------------------------------------------------------------

== URI format

----------------------------------------------------
telegram:type[?options]
----------------------------------------------------



// component options: START
include::partial$component-configure-options.adoc[]
include::partial$component-endpoint-options.adoc[]
include::partial$component-endpoint-headers.adoc[]
// component options: END


== Usage

The Telegram component supports both consumer and producer endpoints.
It can also be used in *reactive chatbot mode* (to consume, then produce messages).

=== Producer

The following is a basic example of how to send a message to a Telegram chat through the
Telegram Bot API.

.Telegram producer example in Java DSL
[source,java]
---------------------------------------------------------
from("direct:start").to("telegram:bots?authorizationToken=123456789:insertYourAuthorizationTokenHere");
---------------------------------------------------------

.Telegram producer example in Spring XML
[source,xml]
---------------------------------------------
<route>
    <from uri="direct:start"/>
    <to uri="telegram:bots?authorizationToken=123456789:insertYourAuthorizationTokenHere"/>
<route>
---------------------------------------------

The code `123456789:insertYourAuthorizationTokenHere` is the *authorization token* corresponding to the Bot.

When using the producer endpoint without specifying the *chat id* option, the target chat will be identified using information contained in the body or headers of the message.
The following message bodies are allowed for a producer endpoint (messages of type `OutgoingXXXMessage` belong to the package `org.apache.camel.component.telegram.model`)

[width="100%",cols="40%,60%",options="header",]
|===================================================
| Java Type | Description

| `OutgoingTextMessage` | To send a text message to a chat
| `OutgoingPhotoMessage` | To send a photo (JPG, PNG) to a chat
| `OutgoingAudioMessage` | To send a mp3 audio to a chat
| `OutgoingVideoMessage` | To send a mp4 video to a chat
| `OutgoingDocumentMessage` | To send a file to a chat (any media type)
| `OutgoingStickerMessage` | To send a sticker to a chat (WEBP)
| `OutgoingAnswerInlineQuery` | To send answers to an inline query
| `EditMessageTextMessage` | To edit text and game messages (editMessageText)
| `EditMessageCaptionMessage` | To edit captions of messages (editMessageCaption)
| `EditMessageMediaMessage` | To edit animation, audio, document, photo, or video messages. (editMessageMedia)
| `EditMessageReplyMarkupMessage` | To edit only the reply markup of a message. (editMessageReplyMarkup)
| `EditMessageDelete` | To delete a message, including service messages. (deleteMessage)
| `SendLocationMessage` | To send a location (setSendLocation)
| `EditMessageLiveLocationMessage` | To send changes to a live location (editMessageLiveLocation)
| `StopMessageLiveLocationMessage` | To stop updating a live location message sent by the bot or via the bot (for inline bots) before live_period expires (stopMessageLiveLocation)
| `SendVenueMessage` | To send information about a venue (sendVenue)
| `SendInvoiceMessage` | To send an invoice for payment (sendInvoice)
| `CreateInvoiceLinkMessage` | To create a link for an invoice (createInvoiceLink)
| `AnswerShippingQueryMessage` | To reply to shipping queries (answerShippingQuery)
| `AnswerPreCheckoutQueryMessage` | To respond to a pre-checkout query from a payment (answerPreCheckoutQuery)
| `SendChatActionMessage` | To send a chat action status like typing, uploading, etc. (sendChatAction)
| `byte[]` | To send any media type supported. It requires the `CamelTelegramMediaType` header to be set to the appropriate media type
| `String` | To send a text message to a chat. It gets converted automatically into a `OutgoingTextMessage`

|===================================================


=== Consumer

The following is a basic example of how to receive all messages that telegram users are sending to the configured Bot.
In Java DSL

.Telegram consumer example in Java DSL
[source,java]
---------------------------------------------------------
from("telegram:bots?authorizationToken=123456789:insertYourAuthorizationTokenHere")
.bean(ProcessorBean.class)
---------------------------------------------------------

.Telegram producer example in Spring XML
[source,xml]
---------------------------------------------
<route>
    <from uri="telegram:bots?authorizationToken=123456789:insertYourAuthorizationTokenHere"/>
    <bean ref="myBean" />
<route>

<bean id="myBean" class="com.example.MyBean"/>
---------------------------------------------

The `MyBean` is a simple bean that will receive the messages

[source,java]
---------------------------------------------------------
public class MyBean {

    public void process(String message) {
        // or Exchange, or org.apache.camel.component.telegram.model.IncomingMessage (or both)

        // do process
    }

}
---------------------------------------------------------


Supported types for incoming messages are

[width="100%",cols="40%,60%",options="header",]
|===================================================
| Java Type | Description

| `IncomingMessage` | The full object representation of an incoming message
| `String` | The content of the message, for text messages only

|===================================================




=== Reactive Chat-Bot Example

The reactive chatbot mode is a simple way of using the Camel component to build a simple
chatbot that replies directly to chat messages received from the Telegram users.

The following is a basic configuration of the chatbot in Java DSL

.Telegram reactive example in Java
[source,java]
---------------------------------------------------------
from("telegram:bots?authorizationToken=123456789:insertYourAuthorizationTokenHere")
.bean(ChatBotLogic.class)
.to("telegram:bots?authorizationToken=123456789:insertYourAuthorizationTokenHere");
---------------------------------------------------------

.Telegram reactive example in Spring XML
[source,xml]
---------------------------------------------
<route>
    <from uri="telegram:bots?authorizationToken=123456789:insertYourAuthorizationTokenHere"/>
    <bean ref="chatBotLogic" />
    <to uri="telegram:bots?authorizationToken=123456789:insertYourAuthorizationTokenHere"/>
<route>

<bean id="chatBotLogic" class="com.example.ChatBotLogic"/>
---------------------------------------------


The `ChatBotLogic` is a simple bean that implements a generic String-to-String method.

[source,java]
---------------------------------------------------------
public class ChatBotLogic {

    public String chatBotProcess(String message) {
        if( "do-not-reply".equals(message) ) {
            return null; // no response in the chat
        }

        return "echo from the bot: " + message; // echoes the message
    }

}
---------------------------------------------------------


Every non-null string returned by the `chatBotProcess` method is automatically routed to the
chat that originated the request (as the `CamelTelegramChatId` header is used to route the message).

=== Getting the Chat ID

If you want to push messages to a specific Telegram chat when an event occurs, you need to
retrieve the corresponding chat ID. The chat ID is not currently shown in the telegram client,
but you can obtain it using a simple route.

First, add the bot to the chat where you want to push messages, then run a route like the following one.

[source,java]
---------------------------------------------------------
from("telegram:bots?authorizationToken=123456789:insertYourAuthorizationTokenHere")
.to("log:INFO?showHeaders=true");
---------------------------------------------------------

Any message received by the bot will be dumped to your log together with information about the chat (`CamelTelegramChatId`
header).

Once you get the chat ID, you can use the following sample route to push a message to it.

[source,java]
---------------------------------------------------------
from("timer:tick")
.setBody().constant("Hello")
to("telegram:bots?authorizationToken=123456789:insertYourAuthorizationTokenHere&chatId=123456")
---------------------------------------------------------

Note that the corresponding URI parameter is simply `chatId`.

=== Customizing keyboard

You can customize the user keyboard instead of asking him to write an option.
`OutgoingTextMessage` has the property `ReplyMarkup` which can be used for such a thing.

[source,java]
---------------------------------------------------------
from("telegram:bots?authorizationToken=123456789:insertYourAuthorizationTokenHere")
    .process(exchange -> {

        OutgoingTextMessage msg = new OutgoingTextMessage();
        msg.setText("Choose one option!");

        InlineKeyboardButton buttonOptionOneI = InlineKeyboardButton.builder()
                .text("Option One - I").build();

        InlineKeyboardButton buttonOptionOneII = InlineKeyboardButton.builder()
                .text("Option One - II").build();

        InlineKeyboardButton buttonOptionTwoI = InlineKeyboardButton.builder()
                .text("Option Two - I").build();

        ReplyKeyboardMarkup replyMarkup = ReplyKeyboardMarkup.builder()
                .keyboard()
                    .addRow(Arrays.asList(buttonOptionOneI, buttonOptionOneII))
                    .addRow(Arrays.asList(buttonOptionTwoI))
                    .close()
                .oneTimeKeyboard(true)
                .build();

        msg.setReplyMarkup(replyMarkup);

        exchange.getIn().setBody(msg);
    })
    .to("telegram:bots?authorizationToken=123456789:insertYourAuthorizationTokenHere");
---------------------------------------------------------

If you want to disable it, the next message must have the property `removeKeyboard` set on `ReplyKeyboardMarkup` object.

[source,java]
---------------------------------------------------------
from("telegram:bots?authorizationToken=123456789:insertYourAuthorizationTokenHere")
    .process(exchange -> {

        OutgoingTextMessage msg = new OutgoingTextMessage();
        msg.setText("Your answer was accepted!");

        ReplyKeyboardMarkup replyMarkup = ReplyKeyboardMarkup.builder()
                .removeKeyboard(true)
                .build();

        msg.setReplyKeyboardMarkup(replyMarkup);

        exchange.getIn().setBody(msg);
    })
    .to("telegram:bots?authorizationToken=123456789:insertYourAuthorizationTokenHere");
---------------------------------------------------------


=== Webhook Mode

The Telegram component supports usage in the *webhook mode* using the *camel-webhook* component.

To enable webhook mode, users need first to add a REST implementation to their application.
Maven users, for example, can add *netty-http* to their `pom.xml` file:

[source,xml]
------------------------------------------------------------
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.apache.camel</groupId>
    <artifactId>camel-netty-http</artifactId>
    <version>x.x.x</version>
    <!-- use the same version as your Camel core version -->
</dependency>
------------------------------------------------------------

Once done, you need to prepend the webhook URI to the telegram URI you want to use.

In Java DSL:

[source,java]
---------------------------------------------------------
from("webhook:telegram:bots?authorizationToken=123456789:insertYourAuthorizationTokenHere").to("log:info");
---------------------------------------------------------

Some endpoints will be exposed by your application and Telegram will be configured to send messages to them.
You need to ensure that your server is exposed to the internet and to pass the right value of the
*camel.component.webhook.configuration.webhook-external-url* property.

Refer to the *camel-webhook* component documentation for instructions on how to set it.


include::spring-boot:partial$starter.adoc[]

Commit message:

CAMEL-22815: Support for payments in telegram stars (XTR) (#20776)

components/camel-telegram/src/main/docs/telegram-component.adoc, after:

= Telegram Component
:doctitle: Telegram
:shortname: telegram
:artifactid: camel-telegram
:description: Send and receive messages using the Telegram Bot API.
:since: 2.18
:supportlevel: Stable
:tabs-sync-option:
:component-header: Both producer and consumer are supported
//Manually maintained attributes
:camel-spring-boot-name: telegram

*Since Camel {since}*

*{component-header}*

The Telegram component provides access to the https://core.telegram.org/bots/api[Telegram Bot API].
It allows a Camel-based application to send and receive messages by acting as a Bot, participating in
direct conversations with normal users, private and public groups or channels.

A Telegram Bot must be created before using this component, following the instructions at the
https://core.telegram.org/bots#3-how-do-i-create-a-bot[Telegram Bot developers home].
When a new Bot is created, the https://telegram.me/botfather[BotFather] provides an
**authorization token** corresponding to the Bot. The authorization token is a mandatory parameter
for the camel-telegram endpoint.

[NOTE]
====
To allow the Bot to receive all messages exchanged within a group or channel (not just
the ones starting with a '/' character), ask the BotFather to *disable the privacy mode*, using the
*/setprivacy* command.
====


Maven users will need to add the following dependency to their `pom.xml`
for this component:

[source,xml]
------------------------------------------------------------
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.apache.camel</groupId>
    <artifactId>camel-telegram</artifactId>
    <version>x.x.x</version>
    <!-- use the same version as your Camel core version -->
</dependency>
------------------------------------------------------------

== URI format

----------------------------------------------------
telegram:type[?options]
----------------------------------------------------



// component options: START
include::partial$component-configure-options.adoc[]
include::partial$component-endpoint-options.adoc[]
include::partial$component-endpoint-headers.adoc[]
// component options: END


== Usage

The Telegram component supports both consumer and producer endpoints.
It can also be used in *reactive chatbot mode* (to consume, then produce messages).

=== Producer

The following is a basic example of how to send a message to a Telegram chat through the
Telegram Bot API.

.Telegram producer example in Java DSL
[source,java]
---------------------------------------------------------
from("direct:start").to("telegram:bots?authorizationToken=123456789:insertYourAuthorizationTokenHere");
---------------------------------------------------------

.Telegram producer example in Spring XML
[source,xml]
---------------------------------------------
<route>
    <from uri="direct:start"/>
    <to uri="telegram:bots?authorizationToken=123456789:insertYourAuthorizationTokenHere"/>
<route>
---------------------------------------------

The code `123456789:insertYourAuthorizationTokenHere` is the *authorization token* corresponding to the Bot.

When using the producer endpoint without specifying the *chat id* option, the target chat will be identified using information contained in the body or headers of the message.
The following message bodies are allowed for a producer endpoint (messages of type `OutgoingXXXMessage` belong to the package `org.apache.camel.component.telegram.model`)

[width="100%",cols="40%,60%",options="header",]
|===================================================
| Java Type | Description

| `OutgoingTextMessage` | To send a text message to a chat
| `OutgoingPhotoMessage` | To send a photo (JPG, PNG) to a chat
| `OutgoingAudioMessage` | To send a mp3 audio to a chat
| `OutgoingVideoMessage` | To send a mp4 video to a chat
| `OutgoingDocumentMessage` | To send a file to a chat (any media type)
| `OutgoingStickerMessage` | To send a sticker to a chat (WEBP)
| `OutgoingAnswerInlineQuery` | To send answers to an inline query
| `EditMessageTextMessage` | To edit text and game messages (editMessageText)
| `EditMessageCaptionMessage` | To edit captions of messages (editMessageCaption)
| `EditMessageMediaMessage` | To edit animation, audio, document, photo, or video messages. (editMessageMedia)
| `EditMessageReplyMarkupMessage` | To edit only the reply markup of a message. (editMessageReplyMarkup)
| `EditMessageDelete` | To delete a message, including service messages. (deleteMessage)
| `SendLocationMessage` | To send a location (setSendLocation)
| `EditMessageLiveLocationMessage` | To send changes to a live location (editMessageLiveLocation)
| `StopMessageLiveLocationMessage` | To stop updating a live location message sent by the bot or via the bot (for inline bots) before live_period expires (stopMessageLiveLocation)
| `SendVenueMessage` | To send information about a venue (sendVenue)
| `SendInvoiceMessage` | To send an invoice for payment (sendInvoice)
| `CreateInvoiceLinkMessage` | To create a link for an invoice (createInvoiceLink)
| `AnswerShippingQueryMessage` | To reply to shipping queries (answerShippingQuery)
| `AnswerPreCheckoutQueryMessage` | To respond to a pre-checkout query from a payment (answerPreCheckoutQuery)
| `SendChatActionMessage` | To send a chat action status like typing, uploading, etc. (sendChatAction)
| `GetMyStarBalanceMessage` | To get the bot's current Telegram Star balance (getMyStarBalance)
| `GetStarTransactionsMessage` | To get the list of bot's Telegram Star transactions (getStarTransactions)
| `RefundStarPaymentMessage` | To refund a successful payment in Telegram Stars (refundStarPayment)
| `EditUserStarSubscriptionMessage` | To cancel or re-enable extension of a subscription paid in Telegram Stars (editUserStarSubscription)
| `byte[]` | To send any media type supported. It requires the `CamelTelegramMediaType` header to be set to the appropriate media type
| `String` | To send a text message to a chat. It gets converted automatically into a `OutgoingTextMessage`

|===================================================


=== Consumer

The following is a basic example of how to receive all messages that telegram users are sending to the configured Bot.
In Java DSL

.Telegram consumer example in Java DSL
[source,java]
---------------------------------------------------------
from("telegram:bots?authorizationToken=123456789:insertYourAuthorizationTokenHere")
.bean(ProcessorBean.class)
---------------------------------------------------------

.Telegram producer example in Spring XML
[source,xml]
---------------------------------------------
<route>
    <from uri="telegram:bots?authorizationToken=123456789:insertYourAuthorizationTokenHere"/>
    <bean ref="myBean" />
<route>

<bean id="myBean" class="com.example.MyBean"/>
---------------------------------------------

The `MyBean` is a simple bean that will receive the messages

[source,java]
---------------------------------------------------------
public class MyBean {

    public void process(String message) {
        // or Exchange, or org.apache.camel.component.telegram.model.IncomingMessage (or both)

        // do process
    }

}
---------------------------------------------------------


Supported types for incoming messages are

[width="100%",cols="40%,60%",options="header",]
|===================================================
| Java Type | Description

| `IncomingMessage` | The full object representation of an incoming message
| `String` | The content of the message, for text messages only

|===================================================




=== Reactive Chat-Bot Example

The reactive chatbot mode is a simple way of using the Camel component to build a simple
chatbot that replies directly to chat messages received from the Telegram users.

The following is a basic configuration of the chatbot in Java DSL

.Telegram reactive example in Java
[source,java]
---------------------------------------------------------
from("telegram:bots?authorizationToken=123456789:insertYourAuthorizationTokenHere")
.bean(ChatBotLogic.class)
.to("telegram:bots?authorizationToken=123456789:insertYourAuthorizationTokenHere");
---------------------------------------------------------

.Telegram reactive example in Spring XML
[source,xml]
---------------------------------------------
<route>
    <from uri="telegram:bots?authorizationToken=123456789:insertYourAuthorizationTokenHere"/>
    <bean ref="chatBotLogic" />
    <to uri="telegram:bots?authorizationToken=123456789:insertYourAuthorizationTokenHere"/>
<route>

<bean id="chatBotLogic" class="com.example.ChatBotLogic"/>
---------------------------------------------


The `ChatBotLogic` is a simple bean that implements a generic String-to-String method.

[source,java]
---------------------------------------------------------
public class ChatBotLogic {

    public String chatBotProcess(String message) {
        if( "do-not-reply".equals(message) ) {
            return null; // no response in the chat
        }

        return "echo from the bot: " + message; // echoes the message
    }

}
---------------------------------------------------------


Every non-null string returned by the `chatBotProcess` method is automatically routed to the
chat that originated the request (as the `CamelTelegramChatId` header is used to route the message).

=== Getting the Chat ID

If you want to push messages to a specific Telegram chat when an event occurs, you need to
retrieve the corresponding chat ID. The chat ID is not currently shown in the telegram client,
but you can obtain it using a simple route.

First, add the bot to the chat where you want to push messages, then run a route like the following one.

[source,java]
---------------------------------------------------------
from("telegram:bots?authorizationToken=123456789:insertYourAuthorizationTokenHere")
.to("log:INFO?showHeaders=true");
---------------------------------------------------------

Any message received by the bot will be dumped to your log together with information about the chat (`CamelTelegramChatId`
header).

Once you get the chat ID, you can use the following sample route to push a message to it.

[source,java]
---------------------------------------------------------
from("timer:tick")
.setBody().constant("Hello")
to("telegram:bots?authorizationToken=123456789:insertYourAuthorizationTokenHere&chatId=123456")
---------------------------------------------------------

Note that the corresponding URI parameter is simply `chatId`.

=== Customizing keyboard

You can customize the user keyboard instead of asking him to write an option.
`OutgoingTextMessage` has the property `ReplyMarkup` which can be used for such a thing.

[source,java]
---------------------------------------------------------
from("telegram:bots?authorizationToken=123456789:insertYourAuthorizationTokenHere")
    .process(exchange -> {

        OutgoingTextMessage msg = new OutgoingTextMessage();
        msg.setText("Choose one option!");

        InlineKeyboardButton buttonOptionOneI = InlineKeyboardButton.builder()
                .text("Option One - I").build();

        InlineKeyboardButton buttonOptionOneII = InlineKeyboardButton.builder()
                .text("Option One - II").build();

        InlineKeyboardButton buttonOptionTwoI = InlineKeyboardButton.builder()
                .text("Option Two - I").build();

        ReplyKeyboardMarkup replyMarkup = ReplyKeyboardMarkup.builder()
                .keyboard()
                    .addRow(Arrays.asList(buttonOptionOneI, buttonOptionOneII))
                    .addRow(Arrays.asList(buttonOptionTwoI))
                    .close()
                .oneTimeKeyboard(true)
                .build();

        msg.setReplyMarkup(replyMarkup);

        exchange.getIn().setBody(msg);
    })
    .to("telegram:bots?authorizationToken=123456789:insertYourAuthorizationTokenHere");
---------------------------------------------------------

If you want to disable it, the next message must have the property `removeKeyboard` set on `ReplyKeyboardMarkup` object.

[source,java]
---------------------------------------------------------
from("telegram:bots?authorizationToken=123456789:insertYourAuthorizationTokenHere")
    .process(exchange -> {

        OutgoingTextMessage msg = new OutgoingTextMessage();
        msg.setText("Your answer was accepted!");

        ReplyKeyboardMarkup replyMarkup = ReplyKeyboardMarkup.builder()
                .removeKeyboard(true)
                .build();

        msg.setReplyKeyboardMarkup(replyMarkup);

        exchange.getIn().setBody(msg);
    })
    .to("telegram:bots?authorizationToken=123456789:insertYourAuthorizationTokenHere");
---------------------------------------------------------


=== Webhook Mode

The Telegram component supports usage in the *webhook mode* using the *camel-webhook* component.

To enable webhook mode, users need first to add a REST implementation to their application.
Maven users, for example, can add *netty-http* to their `pom.xml` file:

[source,xml]
------------------------------------------------------------
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.apache.camel</groupId>
    <artifactId>camel-netty-http</artifactId>
    <version>x.x.x</version>
    <!-- use the same version as your Camel core version -->
</dependency>
------------------------------------------------------------

Once done, you need to prepend the webhook URI to the telegram URI you want to use.

In Java DSL:

[source,java]
---------------------------------------------------------
from("webhook:telegram:bots?authorizationToken=123456789:insertYourAuthorizationTokenHere").to("log:info");
---------------------------------------------------------

Some endpoints will be exposed by your application and Telegram will be configured to send messages to them.
You need to ensure that your server is exposed to the internet and to pass the right value of the
*camel.component.webhook.configuration.webhook-external-url* property.

Refer to the *camel-webhook* component documentation for instructions on how to set it.


include::spring-boot:partial$starter.adoc[]
