core/camel-core-languages/src/main/docs/modules/languages/pages/csimple-language.adoc, before:

= CSimple Language
:doctitle: CSimple
:shortname: csimple
:artifactid: camel-core-languages
:description: Evaluate a compiled simple expression.
:since: 3.7
:supportlevel: Stable
:tabs-sync-option:
//Manually maintained attributes
:camel-spring-boot-name: core
:starter-artifactid: camel-core-starter

*Since Camel {since}*

The CSimple language is *compiled* xref:simple-language.adoc[Simple] language.

== Different between CSimple and Simple

The simple language is a dynamic expression language which is runtime parsed into a set of Camel Expressions or Predicates.

The csimple language is parsed into regular Java source code and compiled together with all the other source code,
or compiled once during bootstrap via the `camel-csimple-joor` module.

The simple language is generally very lightweight and fast, however for some use-cases with dynamic method calls via OGNL paths,
then the simple language does runtime introspection and reflection calls. This has an overhead on performance,
and was one of the reasons why csimple was created.

The csimple language requires to be typesafe and method calls via OGNL paths requires to know the type during parsing.
This means for csimple languages expressions you would need to provide the class type in the script,
whereas simple introspects this at runtime.

In other words the simple language is using _duck typing_ (if it looks like a duck, and quacks like a duck, then it is a duck)
and csimple is using Java type (typesafety). If there is a type error then simple will report this at runtime,
and with csimple there will be a Java compilation error.

=== Additional CSimple functions

The csimple language includes some additional functions to support common use-cases working with `Collection`, `Map` or array types.
The following functions _bodyAsIndex_, _headerAsIndex_, and _exchangePropertyAsIndex_ is used for these use-cases as they are typed.

[width="100%",cols="10%,10%,80%",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Function |Type |Description

|bodyAsIndex(_type_, _index_) |Type | To be used for collecting the body from an existing `Collection`, `Map` or array (lookup by the index)
and then converting the body to the given type determined by its classname. The converted body can be null.

|mandatoryBodyAsIndex(_type_, _index_) |Type | To be used for collecting the body from an existing `Collection`, `Map` or array (lookup by the index)
and then converting the body to the given type determined by its classname. Expects the body to be not null.

|headerAsIndex(_key_, _type_, _index_) |Type | To be used for collecting a header from an existing `Collection`, `Map` or array (lookup by the index)
and then converting the header value to the given type determined by its classname. The converted header can be null.

|exchangePropertyAsIndex(_key_, _type_, _index_) |Type | To be used for collecting an exchange property from an existing `Collection`, `Map` or array (lookup by the index)
and then converting the exchange property to the given type determined by its classname. The converted exchange property can be null.

|variableAsIndex(_key_, _type_, _index_) |Type | To be used for collecting a variable from an existing `Collection`, `Map` or array (lookup by the index)
and then converting the variable to the given type determined by its classname. The converted variable can be null.

|messageAs(_type_) |Type |Converts the message to the given type determined by its
classname. The converted message can be null.

|=======================================================================

For example given the following simple expression:

====
Hello ${body[0].name}
====

This script has no type information, and the simple language will resolve this at runtime, by introspecting the message body
and if it's a collection based then lookup the first element, and then invoke a method named `getName` via reflection.

In csimple (compiled) we want to pre compile this and therefore the end user must provide type information with the _bodyAsIndex_ function:

====
Hello ${bodyAsIndex(com.foo.MyUser, 0).name}
====


== Compilation

The csimple language is parsed into regular Java source code and compiled together with all the other source code, or it can be compiled once during bootstrap via the `camel-csimple-joor` module.

There are two ways to compile csimple

- using the `camel-csimple-maven-plugin` generating source code at built time.
- using `camel-csimple-joor` which does runtime in-memory compilation during bootstrap of Camel.

=== Using camel-csimple-maven-plugin

The `camel-csimple-maven-plugin` Maven plugin is used for discovering all the csimple scripts from the source code, and then automatic generate source code in the `src/generated/java` folder, which then gets compiled together with all the other sources.

The maven plugin will do source code scanning of `.java` and `.xml` files (Java and XML DSL).
The scanner limits to detect certain code patterns, and it may miss discovering some csimple scripts if they are being used in unusual/rare ways.

The runtime compilation using `camel-csimple-joor` does not have this limitation.

The benefit is all the csimple scripts will be compiled using the regular Java compiler and therefore everything
is included out of the box as `.class` files in the application JAR file, and no additional dependencies is required at runtime.

To use `camel-csimple-maven-plugin` you need to add it to your `pom.xml` file as shown:

[source,xml]
----
<plugins>
    <!-- generate source code for csimple languages -->
    <plugin>
        <groupId>org.apache.camel</groupId>
        <artifactId>camel-csimple-maven-plugin</artifactId>
        <version>${camel.version}</version>
        <executions>
            <execution>
                <id>generate</id>
                <goals>
                    <goal>generate</goal>
                </goals>
            </execution>
        </executions>
    </plugin>
    <!-- include source code generated to maven sources paths -->
    <plugin>
        <groupId>org.codehaus.mojo</groupId>
        <artifactId>build-helper-maven-plugin</artifactId>
        <version>3.1.0</version>
        <executions>
            <execution>
                <phase>generate-sources</phase>
                <goals>
                    <goal>add-source</goal>
                    <goal>add-resource</goal>
                </goals>
                <configuration>
                    <sources>
                        <source>src/generated/java</source>
                    </sources>
                    <resources>
                        <resource>
                            <directory>src/generated/resources</directory>
                        </resource>
                    </resources>
                </configuration>
            </execution>
        </executions>
    </plugin>
</plugins>
----

And then you must also add the `build-helper-maven-plugin` Maven plugin to include `src/generated` to the list of source folders for the Java compiler,
to ensure the generated source code is compiled and included in the application JAR file.

See the `camel-example-csimple` example at https://github.com/apache/camel-examples[Camel Examples] which uses the maven plugin.

=== Using camel-csimple-joor

The jOOR library integrates with the Java compiler and performs runtime compilation of Java code.

The supported runtime when using `camel-simple-joor` is intended for Java standalone, Spring Boot, Camel Quarkus and other microservices runtimes.
It is not supported on any kind of Java Application Server runtime.

jOOR does not support runtime compilation with Spring Boot using _fat jar_ packaging (https://github.com/jOOQ/jOOR/issues/69),
it works with exploded classpath.

To use `camel-simple-joor` you simply just add it as dependency to the classpath:

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>org.apache.camel</groupId>
  <artifactId>camel-csimple-joor</artifactId>
  <version>x.x.x</version>
</dependency>
----

There is no need for adding Maven plugins to the `pom.xml` file.

See the `camel-example-csimple-joor` example at https://github.com/apache/camel-examples[Camel Examples] which uses the jOOR compiler.

== CSimple Language options

// language options: START
include::partial$language-options.adoc[]
// language options: END

== Limitations

Currently, the csimple language does **not** support:

- nested functions (aka functions inside functions)
- the _null safe_ operator (`?.`).

NOTE: The ternary operator (`? :`) IS supported in csimple. The limitation above refers only to the null-safe operator used in OGNL expressions (e.g., `${body?.address}`).

For example the following scripts cannot compile:

[source,text]
----
    Hello ${bean:greeter(${body}, ${header.counter})}
----

[source,text]
----
    ${bodyAs(MyUser)?.address?.zip} > 10000
----

== Auto imports

The csimple language will automatically import from:

[source,java]
----
import java.util.*;
import java.util.concurrent.*;
import java.util.stream.*;
import org.apache.camel.*;
import org.apache.camel.util.*;
----

== Configuration file

You can configure the csimple language in the `camel-csimple.properties` file which is loaded from the root classpath.

For example you can add additional imports in the `camel-csimple.properties` file by adding:

[source,properties]
----
import com.foo.MyUser;
import com.bar.*;
import static com.foo.MyHelper.*;
----

You can also add aliases (key=value) where an alias will be used as a shorthand replacement in the code.

[source,properties]
----
echo()=${bodyAs(String)} ${bodyAs(String)}
----

Which allows to use _echo()_ in the csimple language script such as:

[source,java]
----
from("direct:hello")
    .transform(csimple("Hello echo()"))
    .log("You said ${body}");
----

The _echo()_ alias will be replaced with its value resulting in a script as:

[source,java]
----
    .transform(csimple("Hello ${bodyAs(String)} ${bodyAs(String)}"))
----

== See Also

See the xref:simple-language.adoc[Simple] language as csimple has the same set of functions as simple language.

include::spring-boot:partial$starter.adoc[]

Commit message:

core languages should not have SB docs as it does not make sense

core/camel-core-languages/src/main/docs/modules/languages/pages/csimple-language.adoc, after:

= CSimple Language
:doctitle: CSimple
:shortname: csimple
:artifactid: camel-core-languages
:description: Evaluate a compiled simple expression.
:since: 3.7
:supportlevel: Stable
:tabs-sync-option:
//Manually maintained attributes
:camel-spring-boot-name: core
:starter-artifactid: camel-core-starter

*Since Camel {since}*

The CSimple language is *compiled* xref:simple-language.adoc[Simple] language.

== Different between CSimple and Simple

The simple language is a dynamic expression language which is runtime parsed into a set of Camel Expressions or Predicates.

The csimple language is parsed into regular Java source code and compiled together with all the other source code,
or compiled once during bootstrap via the `camel-csimple-joor` module.

The simple language is generally very lightweight and fast, however for some use-cases with dynamic method calls via OGNL paths,
then the simple language does runtime introspection and reflection calls. This has an overhead on performance,
and was one of the reasons why csimple was created.

The csimple language requires to be typesafe and method calls via OGNL paths requires to know the type during parsing.
This means for csimple languages expressions you would need to provide the class type in the script,
whereas simple introspects this at runtime.

In other words the simple language is using _duck typing_ (if it looks like a duck, and quacks like a duck, then it is a duck)
and csimple is using Java type (typesafety). If there is a type error then simple will report this at runtime,
and with csimple there will be a Java compilation error.

=== Additional CSimple functions

The csimple language includes some additional functions to support common use-cases working with `Collection`, `Map` or array types.
The following functions _bodyAsIndex_, _headerAsIndex_, and _exchangePropertyAsIndex_ is used for these use-cases as they are typed.

[width="100%",cols="10%,10%,80%",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Function |Type |Description

|bodyAsIndex(_type_, _index_) |Type | To be used for collecting the body from an existing `Collection`, `Map` or array (lookup by the index)
and then converting the body to the given type determined by its classname. The converted body can be null.

|mandatoryBodyAsIndex(_type_, _index_) |Type | To be used for collecting the body from an existing `Collection`, `Map` or array (lookup by the index)
and then converting the body to the given type determined by its classname. Expects the body to be not null.

|headerAsIndex(_key_, _type_, _index_) |Type | To be used for collecting a header from an existing `Collection`, `Map` or array (lookup by the index)
and then converting the header value to the given type determined by its classname. The converted header can be null.

|exchangePropertyAsIndex(_key_, _type_, _index_) |Type | To be used for collecting an exchange property from an existing `Collection`, `Map` or array (lookup by the index)
and then converting the exchange property to the given type determined by its classname. The converted exchange property can be null.

|variableAsIndex(_key_, _type_, _index_) |Type | To be used for collecting a variable from an existing `Collection`, `Map` or array (lookup by the index)
and then converting the variable to the given type determined by its classname. The converted variable can be null.

|messageAs(_type_) |Type |Converts the message to the given type determined by its
classname. The converted message can be null.

|=======================================================================

For example given the following simple expression:

====
Hello ${body[0].name}
====

This script has no type information, and the simple language will resolve this at runtime, by introspecting the message body
and if it's a collection based then lookup the first element, and then invoke a method named `getName` via reflection.

In csimple (compiled) we want to pre compile this and therefore the end user must provide type information with the _bodyAsIndex_ function:

====
Hello ${bodyAsIndex(com.foo.MyUser, 0).name}
====


== Compilation

The csimple language is parsed into regular Java source code and compiled together with all the other source code, or it can be compiled once during bootstrap via the `camel-csimple-joor` module.

There are two ways to compile csimple

- using the `camel-csimple-maven-plugin` generating source code at built time.
- using `camel-csimple-joor` which does runtime in-memory compilation during bootstrap of Camel.

=== Using camel-csimple-maven-plugin

The `camel-csimple-maven-plugin` Maven plugin is used for discovering all the csimple scripts from the source code, and then automatic generate source code in the `src/generated/java` folder, which then gets compiled together with all the other sources.

The maven plugin will do source code scanning of `.java` and `.xml` files (Java and XML DSL).
The scanner limits to detect certain code patterns, and it may miss discovering some csimple scripts if they are being used in unusual/rare ways.

The runtime compilation using `camel-csimple-joor` does not have this limitation.

The benefit is all the csimple scripts will be compiled using the regular Java compiler and therefore everything
is included out of the box as `.class` files in the application JAR file, and no additional dependencies is required at runtime.

To use `camel-csimple-maven-plugin` you need to add it to your `pom.xml` file as shown:

[source,xml]
----
<plugins>
    <!-- generate source code for csimple languages -->
    <plugin>
        <groupId>org.apache.camel</groupId>
        <artifactId>camel-csimple-maven-plugin</artifactId>
        <version>${camel.version}</version>
        <executions>
            <execution>
                <id>generate</id>
                <goals>
                    <goal>generate</goal>
                </goals>
            </execution>
        </executions>
    </plugin>
    <!-- include source code generated to maven sources paths -->
    <plugin>
        <groupId>org.codehaus.mojo</groupId>
        <artifactId>build-helper-maven-plugin</artifactId>
        <version>3.1.0</version>
        <executions>
            <execution>
                <phase>generate-sources</phase>
                <goals>
                    <goal>add-source</goal>
                    <goal>add-resource</goal>
                </goals>
                <configuration>
                    <sources>
                        <source>src/generated/java</source>
                    </sources>
                    <resources>
                        <resource>
                            <directory>src/generated/resources</directory>
                        </resource>
                    </resources>
                </configuration>
            </execution>
        </executions>
    </plugin>
</plugins>
----

And then you must also add the `build-helper-maven-plugin` Maven plugin to include `src/generated` to the list of source folders for the Java compiler,
to ensure the generated source code is compiled and included in the application JAR file.

See the `camel-example-csimple` example at https://github.com/apache/camel-examples[Camel Examples] which uses the maven plugin.

=== Using camel-csimple-joor

The jOOR library integrates with the Java compiler and performs runtime compilation of Java code.

The supported runtime when using `camel-simple-joor` is intended for Java standalone, Spring Boot, Camel Quarkus and other microservices runtimes.
It is not supported on any kind of Java Application Server runtime.

jOOR does not support runtime compilation with Spring Boot using _fat jar_ packaging (https://github.com/jOOQ/jOOR/issues/69),
it works with exploded classpath.

To use `camel-simple-joor` you simply just add it as dependency to the classpath:

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>org.apache.camel</groupId>
  <artifactId>camel-csimple-joor</artifactId>
  <version>x.x.x</version>
</dependency>
----

There is no need for adding Maven plugins to the `pom.xml` file.

See the `camel-example-csimple-joor` example at https://github.com/apache/camel-examples[Camel Examples] which uses the jOOR compiler.

== CSimple Language options

// language options: START
include::partial$language-options.adoc[]
// language options: END

== Limitations

Currently, the csimple language does **not** support:

- nested functions (aka functions inside functions)
- the _null safe_ operator (`?.`).

NOTE: The ternary operator (`? :`) IS supported in csimple. The limitation above refers only to the null-safe operator used in OGNL expressions (e.g., `${body?.address}`).

For example the following scripts cannot compile:

[source,text]
----
    Hello ${bean:greeter(${body}, ${header.counter})}
----

[source,text]
----
    ${bodyAs(MyUser)?.address?.zip} > 10000
----

== Auto imports

The csimple language will automatically import from:

[source,java]
----
import java.util.*;
import java.util.concurrent.*;
import java.util.stream.*;
import org.apache.camel.*;
import org.apache.camel.util.*;
----

== Configuration file

You can configure the csimple language in the `camel-csimple.properties` file which is loaded from the root classpath.

For example you can add additional imports in the `camel-csimple.properties` file by adding:

[source,properties]
----
import com.foo.MyUser;
import com.bar.*;
import static com.foo.MyHelper.*;
----

You can also add aliases (key=value) where an alias will be used as a shorthand replacement in the code.

[source,properties]
----
echo()=${bodyAs(String)} ${bodyAs(String)}
----

Which allows to use _echo()_ in the csimple language script such as:

[source,java]
----
from("direct:hello")
    .transform(csimple("Hello echo()"))
    .log("You said ${body}");
----

The _echo()_ alias will be replaced with its value resulting in a script as:

[source,java]
----
    .transform(csimple("Hello ${bodyAs(String)} ${bodyAs(String)}"))
----

== See Also

See the xref:simple-language.adoc[Simple] language as csimple has the same set of functions as simple language.

== Dependencies

The CSimple language is part of *camel-core* and also requires *camel-simple-joor* JAR.
