core/camel-core-languages/src/main/docs/modules/languages/pages/tokenize-language.adoc, before:

= Tokenize Language
:doctitle: Tokenize
:shortname: tokenize
:artifactid: camel-core-languages
:description: Tokenize text payloads using delimiter patterns.
:since: 2.0
:supportlevel: Stable
:tabs-sync-option:
//Manually maintained attributes
:camel-spring-boot-name: core
:starter-artifactid: camel-core-starter

*Since Camel {since}*

The tokenizer language is a built-in language in `camel-core`, which is
most often used with the xref:eips:split-eip.adoc[Split] EIP
to split a message using a token-based strategy.

The tokenizer language is intended to tokenize text documents using a
specified delimiter pattern. It can also be used to tokenize XML
documents with some limited capability. For a truly XML-aware
tokenization, the use of the xref:xtokenize-language.adoc[XML Tokenize]
language is recommended as it offers a faster, more efficient
tokenization specifically for XML documents.


== Tokenize Options

// language options: START
include::partial$language-options.adoc[]
// language options: END


== Example

The following example shows how to take a request from the direct:a endpoint
then split it into pieces using an xref:manual::expression.adoc[Expression],
then forward each piece to direct:b:

[source,xml]
----
<route>
  <from uri="direct:a"/>
  <split>
    <tokenize token="\n"/>
    <to uri="direct:b"/>
  </split>
</route>
----

And in Java DSL:

[source,java]
----
from("direct:a")
    .split(body().tokenize("\n"))
        .to("direct:b");
----

== See Also

For more examples see xref:eips:split-eip.adoc[Split] EIP.

include::spring-boot:partial$starter.adoc[]

Commit message:

core languages should not have SB docs as it does not make sense

core/camel-core-languages/src/main/docs/modules/languages/pages/tokenize-language.adoc, after:

= Tokenize Language
:doctitle: Tokenize
:shortname: tokenize
:artifactid: camel-core-languages
:description: Tokenize text payloads using delimiter patterns.
:since: 2.0
:supportlevel: Stable
:tabs-sync-option:
//Manually maintained attributes
:camel-spring-boot-name: core
:starter-artifactid: camel-core-starter

*Since Camel {since}*

The tokenizer language is a built-in language in `camel-core`, which is
most often used with the xref:eips:split-eip.adoc[Split] EIP
to split a message using a token-based strategy.

The tokenizer language is intended to tokenize text documents using a
specified delimiter pattern. It can also be used to tokenize XML
documents with some limited capability. For a truly XML-aware
tokenization, the use of the xref:xtokenize-language.adoc[XML Tokenize]
language is recommended as it offers a faster, more efficient
tokenization specifically for XML documents.


== Tokenize Options

// language options: START
include::partial$language-options.adoc[]
// language options: END


== Example

The following example shows how to take a request from the direct:a endpoint
then split it into pieces using an xref:manual::expression.adoc[Expression],
then forward each piece to direct:b:

[source,xml]
----
<route>
  <from uri="direct:a"/>
  <split>
    <tokenize token="\n"/>
    <to uri="direct:b"/>
  </split>
</route>
----

And in Java DSL:

[source,java]
----
from("direct:a")
    .split(body().tokenize("\n"))
        .to("direct:b");
----

== See Also

For more examples see xref:eips:split-eip.adoc[Split] EIP.

== Dependencies

The Tokenize language is part of *camel-core*.
