=Camel-DNS

This is an additional component for Camel to run DNS queries, using DNSJava.

The component should be a thin layer on top of DNSJava.

==License

Licensed under ASL 2.0

See the LICENSE file.

=Functionalities

==IP lookup

<code>
        <route id="IPCheck">
            <from uri="direct:start"/>
            <to uri="dns:ip"/>
            ...
        </route>
</code>

This looks up a domain's IP. For example, www.example.com resolves to 192.0.32.10.

The dns:ip URI will look for those headers:
* dns.domain: the domain name.

==DNS lookup

<code>
        <route id="IPCheck">
            <from uri="direct:start"/>
            <to uri="dns:lookup"/>
            ...
        </route>
</code>

This returns a set of DNS records associated with a domain.

The dns:lookup URI will look for those headers:
* dns.name: the lookup name. Usually the domain. Mandatory.
* dns.type: the type of the lookup. Should match the values of org.xbill.dns.Type. Optional.
* dns.class: the DNS class of the lookup. Should match the values of org.xbill.dns.DClass. Optional.

==DNS Dig

Dig is a Unix command-line utility to run DNS queries.

<code>
        <route id="IPCheck">
            <from uri="direct:start"/>
            <to uri="dns:dig"/>
            ....
        </route>
</code>


The dns:dig URI will look for those headers:
* dns.server: the server in particular for the query. If none is given, the default one specified by the OS will be used.
* dns.query: the query itself. Mandatory.
* dns.type: the type of the lookup. Should match the values of org.xbill.dns.Type. Optional.
* dns.class: the DNS class of the lookup. Should match the values org.xbill.dns.DClass. Optional.
