components/camel-groovy/src/main/docs/groovy-language.adoc, before:

= Groovy Language
:doctitle: Groovy
:shortname: groovy
:artifactid: camel-groovy
:description: Evaluates a Groovy script.
:since: 1.3
:supportlevel: Stable
:tabs-sync-option:
//Manually maintained attributes
:camel-spring-boot-name: groovy

*Since Camel {since}*

Camel has support for using http://www.groovy-lang.org/[Groovy].

For example, you can use Groovy in a xref:manual::predicate.adoc[Predicate]
with the xref:eips:filter-eip.adoc[Message
Filter] EIP.

[source,java]
---------------------------------------
groovy("someGroovyExpression")
---------------------------------------

== Groovy Options

// language options: START
include::partial$language-options.adoc[]
// language options: END

== Usage

=== Groovy Context

Camel will provide exchange information in the Groovy context (just
a `Map`). The `Exchange` is transferred as:

[width="100%",cols="50%,50%",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|key |value

|`body` |The message body.

|`header` |The headers of the message.
|`headers` |The headers of the message.

|`variable` |The exchange variables
|`variables` |The exchange variables

|`exchangeProperty` |The exchange properties.
|`exchangeProperties` |The exchange properties.

|`exchange` |The `Exchange` itself.
|`camelContext` |The Camel Context.
|`exception` | If the exchange failed then this is the caused exception.

|`request` |The message.
|`response` | *Deprecated* The Out message (only for InOut message exchange pattern).

|`log` | Can be used for logging purposes such as `log.info('Using body: {}', body)`.
|=======================================================================


=== How to get the result from multiple statements script

As the Groovy script engine evaluate method just return a `Null` if it runs a
multiple statements script. Camel now looks up the value of script result
by using the key of `result` from the value set. If you have multiple
statements scripts, you need to make sure you set the value of result
variable as the script return value.

[source,groovy]
-------------------------------------------------------------
bar = "baz"
// some other statements ...
// camel take the result value as the script evaluation result
result = body * 2 + 1
-------------------------------------------------------------

=== Customizing Groovy Shell

For very special use-cases you may need to use a custom `GroovyShell` instance in your
Groovy expressions. To provide the custom `GroovyShell`, add an implementation
of the `org.apache.camel.language.groovy.GroovyShellFactory` SPI
interface to the Camel registry.

[source,java]
----
public class CustomGroovyShellFactory implements GroovyShellFactory {

  public GroovyShell createGroovyShell(Exchange exchange) {
    ImportCustomizer importCustomizer = new ImportCustomizer();
    importCustomizer.addStaticStars("com.example.Utils");
    CompilerConfiguration configuration = new CompilerConfiguration();
    configuration.addCompilationCustomizers(importCustomizer);
    return new GroovyShell(configuration);
  }

}
----

Camel will then use your custom GroovyShell instance (containing your
custom static imports), instead of the default one.

=== Loading script from external resource

You can externalize the script and have Camel load it from a resource
such as `"classpath:"`, `"file:"`, or `"http:"`.
This is done using the following syntax: `"resource:scheme:location"`,
e.g., to refer to a file on the classpath you can do:

[source,java]
-------------------------------------------------------------------
.setHeader("myHeader").groovy("resource:classpath:mygroovy.groovy")
-------------------------------------------------------------------

=== Dependencies

To use scripting languages in your camel routes, you need to add a
dependency on *camel-groovy*.

If you use Maven you could just add the following to your `pom.xml`,
substituting the version number for the latest and greatest release (see
the download page for the latest versions).

[source,xml]
---------------------------------------
<dependency>
  <groupId>org.apache.camel</groupId>
  <artifactId>camel-groovy</artifactId>
  <version>x.x.x</version>
</dependency>
---------------------------------------

== Examples

In the example below, we use a groovy script as predicate in the message filter,
to determine if any line items are over $100:

[tabs]
====

Java::
+
[source,java]
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
from("queue:foo")
    .filter(groovy("body.lineItems.any { i -> i.value > 100 }"))
        .to("queue:bar")
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

XML DSL::
+
[source,xml]
----
<route>
    <from uri="queue:foo"/>
    <filter>
        <groovy>body.lineItems.any { i -> i.value > 100 }</groovy>
        <to uri="queue:bar"/>
    </filter>
</route>
----

====

include::spring-boot:partial$starter.adoc[]

Commit message:

CAMEL-21717: camel-groovy - Make it easier to work with attachments

components/camel-groovy/src/main/docs/groovy-language.adoc, after:

= Groovy Language
:doctitle: Groovy
:shortname: groovy
:artifactid: camel-groovy
:description: Evaluates a Groovy script.
:since: 1.3
:supportlevel: Stable
:tabs-sync-option:
//Manually maintained attributes
:camel-spring-boot-name: groovy

*Since Camel {since}*

Camel has support for using http://www.groovy-lang.org/[Groovy].

For example, you can use Groovy in a xref:manual::predicate.adoc[Predicate]
with the xref:eips:filter-eip.adoc[Message
Filter] EIP.

[source,java]
---------------------------------------
groovy("someGroovyExpression")
---------------------------------------

== Groovy Options

// language options: START
include::partial$language-options.adoc[]
// language options: END

== Usage

=== Groovy Context

Camel will provide exchange information in the Groovy context (just
a `Map`). The `Exchange` is transferred as:

[width="100%",cols="50%,50%",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|key |value

|`body` |The message body.

|`header` |The headers of the message.
|`headers` |The headers of the message.

|`variable` |The exchange variables
|`variables` |The exchange variables

|`exchangeProperty` |The exchange properties.
|`exchangeProperties` |The exchange properties.

|`exchange` |The `Exchange` itself.
|`camelContext` |The Camel Context.
|`exception` | If the exchange failed then this is the caused exception.

|`request` |The message.
|`response` | *Deprecated* The Out message (only for InOut message exchange pattern).

|`attachments` | A `Map<String,jakarta.activation.DataHandler>` containing file attachments such as from HTTP file uploads, or emails containing files.

|`log` | Can be used for logging purposes such as `log.info('Using body: {}', body)`.
|=======================================================================


=== How to get the result from multiple statements script

As the Groovy script engine evaluate method just return a `Null` if it runs a
multiple statements script. Camel now looks up the value of script result
by using the key of `result` from the value set. If you have multiple
statements scripts, you need to make sure you set the value of result
variable as the script return value.

[source,groovy]
-------------------------------------------------------------
bar = "baz"
// some other statements ...
// camel take the result value as the script evaluation result
result = body * 2 + 1
-------------------------------------------------------------

=== Customizing Groovy Shell

For very special use-cases you may need to use a custom `GroovyShell` instance in your
Groovy expressions. To provide the custom `GroovyShell`, add an implementation
of the `org.apache.camel.language.groovy.GroovyShellFactory` SPI
interface to the Camel registry.

[source,java]
----
public class CustomGroovyShellFactory implements GroovyShellFactory {

  public GroovyShell createGroovyShell(Exchange exchange) {
    ImportCustomizer importCustomizer = new ImportCustomizer();
    importCustomizer.addStaticStars("com.example.Utils");
    CompilerConfiguration configuration = new CompilerConfiguration();
    configuration.addCompilationCustomizers(importCustomizer);
    return new GroovyShell(configuration);
  }

}
----

Camel will then use your custom GroovyShell instance (containing your
custom static imports), instead of the default one.

=== Loading script from external resource

You can externalize the script and have Camel load it from a resource
such as `"classpath:"`, `"file:"`, or `"http:"`.
This is done using the following syntax: `"resource:scheme:location"`,
e.g., to refer to a file on the classpath you can do:

[source,java]
-------------------------------------------------------------------
.setHeader("myHeader").groovy("resource:classpath:mygroovy.groovy")
-------------------------------------------------------------------

=== Dependencies

To use scripting languages in your camel routes, you need to add a
dependency on *camel-groovy*.

If you use Maven you could just add the following to your `pom.xml`,
substituting the version number for the latest and greatest release (see
the download page for the latest versions).

[source,xml]
---------------------------------------
<dependency>
  <groupId>org.apache.camel</groupId>
  <artifactId>camel-groovy</artifactId>
  <version>x.x.x</version>
</dependency>
---------------------------------------

== Examples

In the example below, we use a groovy script as predicate in the message filter,
to determine if any line items are over $100:

[tabs]
====

Java::
+
[source,java]
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
from("queue:foo")
    .filter(groovy("body.lineItems.any { i -> i.value > 100 }"))
        .to("queue:bar")
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

XML DSL::
+
[source,xml]
----
<route>
    <from uri="queue:foo"/>
    <filter>
        <groovy>body.lineItems.any { i -> i.value > 100 }</groovy>
        <to uri="queue:bar"/>
    </filter>
</route>
----

====

include::spring-boot:partial$starter.adoc[]
