components/camel-amqp/src/main/docs/amqp-component.adoc, before:

= AMQP Component
:doctitle: AMQP
:shortname: amqp
:artifactid: camel-amqp
:description: Messaging with AMQP protocol using Apache QPid Client.
:since: 1.2
:supportlevel: Stable
:tabs-sync-option:
:component-header: Both producer and consumer are supported
//Manually maintained attributes
:camel-spring-boot-name: amqp

*Since Camel {since}*

*{component-header}*

The AMQP component supports the
http://www.amqp.org/[AMQP 1.0 protocol]
using the JMS Client API of the http://qpid.apache.org/[Qpid]
project.

Maven users will need to add the following dependency to their `pom.xml`
for this component:

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.apache.camel</groupId>
    <artifactId>camel-amqp</artifactId>
    <version>${camel.version}</version> <!-- use the same version as your Camel core version -->
</dependency>
----

== URI format

[source,java]
----
amqp:[queue:|topic:]destinationName[?options]
----

// component-configure options: START

// component-configure options: END

// component options: START
include::partial$component-configure-options.adoc[]
include::partial$component-endpoint-options.adoc[]
// component options: END

// endpoint options: START

// endpoint options: END



== Usage

As AMQP component is inherited from JMS component, the usage of the
former is almost identical to the latter:

*Using AMQP component*

[source,java]
----
// Consuming from AMQP queue
from("amqp:queue:incoming").
  to(...);
 
// Sending messages to the AMQP topic
from(...).
  to("amqp:topic:notify");
----

== Configuring AMQP component

*Creating AMQP 1.0 component*

AMQPComponents may be created using the provided factory methods, for example:
[source,java]
----
AMQPComponent amqp = AMQPComponent.amqpComponent("amqp://localhost:5672");
 
AMQPComponent authorizedAmqp = AMQPComponent.amqpComponent("amqp://localhost:5672", "user", "password");
----

Alternatively, configure the AMQP Component using the available options for SSL, authentication,
and AMQP Broker host/port.

*SSL configuration*

The component can be configured to connect to an AMQP broker using SSL, for example:

[source,java]
----
AMQPComponent component = new AMQPComponent();
component.setUseSsl(true);
component.setTrustStoreLocation(
        getClass().getClassLoader().getResource("server-ca-truststore.p12").getFile());
component.setTrustStorePassword("securepass");
component.setTrustStoreType("PKCS12");
component.setKeyStoreLocation(
        getClass().getClassLoader().getResource("server-keystore.p12").getFile());
component.setKeyStorePassword("securepass");
component.setKeyStoreType("PKCS12");
----

*Authentication configuration*

A username and password may be provided for AMQP broker authentication:

[source,java]
----
AMQPComponent component = new AMQPComponent();
component.setUsername("camel");
component.setPassword("rider");
----

*AMQP Broker host and port configuration*

[source,java]
----
AMQPComponent amqpComponent = new AMQPComponent();
amqpComponent.setHost("remoteHost");
amqpComponent.setPort(5555);
----

*Spring AMQP connection details auto-configuration*

[source,java]
----
@Bean
AMQPConnectionDetails amqpConnection() {
  return new AMQPConnectionDetails("amqp://localhost:5672"); 
}
 
@Bean
AMQPConnectionDetails securedAmqpConnection() {
  return new AMQPConnectionDetails("amqp://localhost:5672", "username", "password"); 
}
----

Likewise, you can also use CDI producer methods when using Camel-CDI

*AMQP connection details auto-configuration for CDI*

[source,java]
----
@Produces
AMQPConnectionDetails amqpConnection() {
  return new AMQPConnectionDetails("amqp://localhost:5672");
}
----

You can also rely on the xref:properties-component.adoc[Camel properties] to read
the AMQP connection details. Factory
method `AMQPConnectionDetails.discoverAMQP()` attempts to read Camel
properties in a Kubernetes-like convention, just as demonstrated on the
snippet below:

*AMQP connection details auto-configuration*

[source,java]
----
export AMQP_SERVICE_HOST = "mybroker.com"
export AMQP_SERVICE_PORT = "6666"
export AMQP_SERVICE_USERNAME = "username"
export AMQP_SERVICE_PASSWORD = "password"
 
...
 
@Bean
AMQPConnectionDetails amqpConnection() {
  return AMQPConnectionDetails.discoverAMQP(); 
}
----

*Enabling AMQP specific options*

If you, for example, need to enable `amqp.traceFrames` you can do that by appending the option to your URI, like the following example:

[source,java]
----
AMQPComponent amqp = AMQPComponent.amqpComponent("amqp://localhost:5672?amqp.traceFrames=true");
----

For reference, take a look at the https://qpid.apache.org/releases/qpid-jms-1.7.0/docs/index.html[QPID JMS client configuration]

== Using topics

To have using topics working with `camel-amqp` you need to configure the
component to use `topic://` as topic prefix, as shown below:

[source,xml]
----
 <bean id="amqp" class="org.apache.camel.component.amqp.AmqpComponent">
   <property name="connectionFactory">
     <bean class="org.apache.qpid.jms.JmsConnectionFactory" factory-method="createFromURL">
       <property name="remoteURI" value="amqp://localhost:5672" />
       <property name="topicPrefix" value="topic://" />  <!-- only necessary when connecting to ActiveMQ over AMQP 1.0 -->
     </bean>
   </property>
 </bean>
----


Keep in mind that the factory methods `AMQPComponent#amqpComponent(String)` and `AMQPComponent#amqpComponent(String, String, String)` configure
the Topic prefix as `topic://` by default, so you don't have to configure it explicitly.


include::spring-boot:partial$starter.adoc[]

Commit message:

CAMEL-11780 initialize if any option provided

components/camel-amqp/src/main/docs/amqp-component.adoc, after:

= AMQP Component
:doctitle: AMQP
:shortname: amqp
:artifactid: camel-amqp
:description: Messaging with AMQP protocol using Apache QPid Client.
:since: 1.2
:supportlevel: Stable
:tabs-sync-option:
:component-header: Both producer and consumer are supported
//Manually maintained attributes
:camel-spring-boot-name: amqp

*Since Camel {since}*

*{component-header}*

The AMQP component supports the
http://www.amqp.org/[AMQP 1.0 protocol]
using the JMS Client API of the http://qpid.apache.org/[Qpid]
project.

Maven users will need to add the following dependency to their `pom.xml`
for this component:

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.apache.camel</groupId>
    <artifactId>camel-amqp</artifactId>
    <version>${camel.version}</version> <!-- use the same version as your Camel core version -->
</dependency>
----

== URI format

[source,java]
----
amqp:[queue:|topic:]destinationName[?options]
----

// component-configure options: START

// component-configure options: END

// component options: START
include::partial$component-configure-options.adoc[]
include::partial$component-endpoint-options.adoc[]
// component options: END

// endpoint options: START

// endpoint options: END



== Usage

As AMQP component is inherited from JMS component, the usage of the
former is almost identical to the latter:

*Using AMQP component*

[source,java]
----
// Consuming from AMQP queue
from("amqp:queue:incoming").
  to(...);
 
// Sending messages to the AMQP topic
from(...).
  to("amqp:topic:notify");
----

== Configuring AMQP component

*Creating AMQP 1.0 component*

AMQPComponents may be created using the provided factory methods, for example:
[source,java]
----
AMQPComponent amqp = AMQPComponent.amqpComponent("amqp://localhost:5672");
 
AMQPComponent authorizedAmqp = AMQPComponent.amqpComponent("amqp://localhost:5672", "user", "password");
----

Alternatively, the AMQP Component can be initialized by providing one or more of the available options for
configuring SSL, authentication, and AMQP Broker host and port.

*SSL configuration*

The component can be configured to connect to an AMQP broker using SSL by setting the
`useSsl` option and providing keystore and truststore details, for example:

[source,java]
----
AMQPComponent component = new AMQPComponent();
component.setUseSsl(true);
component.setTrustStoreLocation(
        getClass().getClassLoader().getResource("server-ca-truststore.p12").getFile());
component.setTrustStorePassword("securepass");
component.setTrustStoreType("PKCS12");
component.setKeyStoreLocation(
        getClass().getClassLoader().getResource("server-keystore.p12").getFile());
component.setKeyStorePassword("securepass");
component.setKeyStoreType("PKCS12");
----

*Authentication configuration*

A username and password may be provided for AMQP broker authentication:

[source,java]
----
AMQPComponent component = new AMQPComponent();
component.setUsername("camel");
component.setPassword("rider");
----

*AMQP Broker host and port configuration*

[source,java]
----
AMQPComponent amqpComponent = new AMQPComponent();
amqpComponent.setHost("remoteHost");
amqpComponent.setPort(5555);
----

If `host` or `port` options have not been provided and the component is initialized using one or more of the other available
options the host on the AMQP JMSConnectionFactory URI is set to 'localhost' if not provided, and the port is set to '5672'
if not provided.

*Spring AMQP connection details auto-configuration*

[source,java]
----
@Bean
AMQPConnectionDetails amqpConnection() {
  return new AMQPConnectionDetails("amqp://localhost:5672"); 
}
 
@Bean
AMQPConnectionDetails securedAmqpConnection() {
  return new AMQPConnectionDetails("amqp://localhost:5672", "username", "password"); 
}
----

Likewise, you can also use CDI producer methods when using Camel-CDI

*AMQP connection details auto-configuration for CDI*

[source,java]
----
@Produces
AMQPConnectionDetails amqpConnection() {
  return new AMQPConnectionDetails("amqp://localhost:5672");
}
----

You can also rely on the xref:properties-component.adoc[Camel properties] to read
the AMQP connection details. Factory
method `AMQPConnectionDetails.discoverAMQP()` attempts to read Camel
properties in a Kubernetes-like convention, just as demonstrated on the
snippet below:

*AMQP connection details auto-configuration*

[source,java]
----
export AMQP_SERVICE_HOST = "mybroker.com"
export AMQP_SERVICE_PORT = "6666"
export AMQP_SERVICE_USERNAME = "username"
export AMQP_SERVICE_PASSWORD = "password"
 
...
 
@Bean
AMQPConnectionDetails amqpConnection() {
  return AMQPConnectionDetails.discoverAMQP(); 
}
----

*Enabling AMQP specific options*

If you, for example, need to enable `amqp.traceFrames` you can do that by appending the option to your URI, like the following example:

[source,java]
----
AMQPComponent amqp = AMQPComponent.amqpComponent("amqp://localhost:5672?amqp.traceFrames=true");
----

For reference, take a look at the https://qpid.apache.org/releases/qpid-jms-1.7.0/docs/index.html[QPID JMS client configuration]

== Using topics

To have using topics working with `camel-amqp` you need to configure the
component to use `topic://` as topic prefix, as shown below:

[source,xml]
----
 <bean id="amqp" class="org.apache.camel.component.amqp.AmqpComponent">
   <property name="connectionFactory">
     <bean class="org.apache.qpid.jms.JmsConnectionFactory" factory-method="createFromURL">
       <property name="remoteURI" value="amqp://localhost:5672" />
       <property name="topicPrefix" value="topic://" />  <!-- only necessary when connecting to ActiveMQ over AMQP 1.0 -->
     </bean>
   </property>
 </bean>
----


Keep in mind that the factory methods `AMQPComponent#amqpComponent(String)` and `AMQPComponent#amqpComponent(String, String, String)` configure
the Topic prefix as `topic://` by default, so you don't have to configure it explicitly.


include::spring-boot:partial$starter.adoc[]
