components/camel-iggy/src/main/docs/iggy-component.adoc, before:

= Iggy Component
:doctitle: Iggy
:shortname: iggy
:artifactid: camel-iggy
:description: Camel Iggy component
:since: 4.14
:supportlevel: Stable
:tabs-sync-option:
:component-header: Both producer and consumer are supported
//Manually maintained attributes
:camel-spring-boot-name: iggy

*Since Camel {since}*

*{component-header}*

The Iggy component is used for communicating with
https://iggy.incubator.apache.org/[Iggy] message broker.

Maven users will need to add the following dependency to their `pom.xml`
for this component.

[source,xml]
------------------------------------------------------------
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.apache.camel</groupId>
    <artifactId>camel-iggy</artifactId>
    <version>x.x.x</version>
    <!-- use the same version as your Camel core version -->
</dependency>
------------------------------------------------------------

== Netty Version Requirement

The Iggy client library requires Netty 4.2.x or later. If your application uses an older version of Netty (e.g., 4.1.x),
you will need to import the Netty 4.2.x BOM in your `dependencyManagement` section to ensure compatibility with the Iggy client:

[source,xml]
------------------------------------------------------------
<dependencyManagement>
    <dependencies>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>io.netty</groupId>
            <artifactId>netty-bom</artifactId>
            <version>4.2.7.Final</version>
            <type>pom</type>
            <scope>import</scope>
        </dependency>
    </dependencies>
</dependencyManagement>
------------------------------------------------------------

== URI format

---------------------------
iggy:topic[?options]
---------------------------


// component-configure options: START

// component-configure options: END

// component options: START
include::partial$component-configure-options.adoc[]
include::partial$component-endpoint-options.adoc[]
include::partial$component-endpoint-headers.adoc[]
// component options: END

// endpoint options: START

// endpoint options: END

// component headers: START
include::partial$component-endpoint-headers.adoc[]
// component headers: END

== Iggy Headers

The following headers are set on the exchange when consuming messages from Iggy:

[width="100%",cols="2m,2m,5",options="header"]
|===
| Header | Type | Description
| `CamelIggyMessageId` | `String` | The unique identifier of the message.
| `CamelIggyMessageOffset` | `long` | The offset of the message in the partition.
| `CamelIggyMessageTimestamp` | `long` | The timestamp of the message.
| `CamelIggyMessageOriginTimestamp` | `long` | The original timestamp of the message.
| `CamelIggyMessageChecksum` | `long` | The checksum of the message.
| `CamelIggyMessageLength` | `int` | The length of the message.
| `CamelIggyMessageSize` | `int` | The size of the message.
|===

== Examples

=== Consuming messages from Iggy

Here is a minimal route to read messages from an Iggy topic:

[source,java]
----
from("iggy:my_topic?streamName=my_stream&consumerGroupName=my_consumer_group&host=localhost&port=8090")
    .log("Message received from Iggy : ${body}")
    .log("    with id ${headers[CamelIggyMessageId]}")
    .log("    and offset ${headers[CamelIggyMessageOffset]}");
----

=== Producing messages to Iggy

Here is a minimal route to produce messages to an Iggy topic:

[source,java]
----
from("direct:start")
    .setBody(constant("Message from Camel"))
    .to("iggy:my_topic?streamName=my_stream&host=localhost&port=8090");
----

Commit message:

camel-iggy is added in 4.17

components/camel-iggy/src/main/docs/iggy-component.adoc, after:

= Iggy Component
:doctitle: Iggy
:shortname: iggy
:artifactid: camel-iggy
:description: Send and receive message to Apache Iggy streaming platform.
:since: 4.17
:supportlevel: Preview
:tabs-sync-option:
:component-header: Both producer and consumer are supported
//Manually maintained attributes
:camel-spring-boot-name: iggy

*Since Camel {since}*

*{component-header}*

The Iggy component is used for communicating with
https://iggy.incubator.apache.org/[Iggy] message broker.

Maven users will need to add the following dependency to their `pom.xml`
for this component.

[source,xml]
------------------------------------------------------------
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.apache.camel</groupId>
    <artifactId>camel-iggy</artifactId>
    <version>x.x.x</version>
    <!-- use the same version as your Camel core version -->
</dependency>
------------------------------------------------------------

== Netty Version Requirement

The Iggy client library requires Netty 4.2.x or later. If your application uses an older version of Netty (e.g., 4.1.x),
you will need to import the Netty 4.2.x BOM in your `dependencyManagement` section to ensure compatibility with the Iggy client:

[source,xml]
------------------------------------------------------------
<dependencyManagement>
    <dependencies>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>io.netty</groupId>
            <artifactId>netty-bom</artifactId>
            <version>4.2.7.Final</version>
            <type>pom</type>
            <scope>import</scope>
        </dependency>
    </dependencies>
</dependencyManagement>
------------------------------------------------------------

== URI format

---------------------------
iggy:topic[?options]
---------------------------


// component-configure options: START

// component-configure options: END

// component options: START
include::partial$component-configure-options.adoc[]
include::partial$component-endpoint-options.adoc[]
include::partial$component-endpoint-headers.adoc[]
// component options: END

// endpoint options: START

// endpoint options: END

// component headers: START
include::partial$component-endpoint-headers.adoc[]
// component headers: END

== Iggy Headers

The following headers are set on the exchange when consuming messages from Iggy:

[width="100%",cols="2m,2m,5",options="header"]
|===
| Header | Type | Description
| `CamelIggyMessageId` | `String` | The unique identifier of the message.
| `CamelIggyMessageOffset` | `long` | The offset of the message in the partition.
| `CamelIggyMessageTimestamp` | `long` | The timestamp of the message.
| `CamelIggyMessageOriginTimestamp` | `long` | The original timestamp of the message.
| `CamelIggyMessageChecksum` | `long` | The checksum of the message.
| `CamelIggyMessageLength` | `int` | The length of the message.
| `CamelIggyMessageSize` | `int` | The size of the message.
|===

== Examples

=== Consuming messages from Iggy

Here is a minimal route to read messages from an Iggy topic:

[source,java]
----
from("iggy:my_topic?streamName=my_stream&consumerGroupName=my_consumer_group&host=localhost&port=8090")
    .log("Message received from Iggy : ${body}")
    .log("    with id ${headers[CamelIggyMessageId]}")
    .log("    and offset ${headers[CamelIggyMessageOffset]}");
----

=== Producing messages to Iggy

Here is a minimal route to produce messages to an Iggy topic:

[source,java]
----
from("direct:start")
    .setBody(constant("Message from Camel"))
    .to("iggy:my_topic?streamName=my_stream&host=localhost&port=8090");
----
