[[Books-Books]]
=== Books

This page lists the known books about Apache Camel. If you happen to
know a book which is not listed then please contact us, for example
using the link:mailing-lists.html[Mailing Lists].

* http://manning.com/ibsen2/[Camel in Action 2nd edition]
* http://www.manning.com/ibsen[Camel in Action]
* http://www.packtpub.com/apache-camel-developers-cookbook/book[Apache
Camel Developer's Cookbook]
* https://leanpub.com/camel-design-patterns[Camel Design Patterns]
*
https://www.packtpub.com/application-development/mastering-apache-camel[Mastering
Apache Camel]
*
https://www.packtpub.com/application-development/apache-camel-essentials[Apache
Camel Essentials]
* http://www.packtpub.com/apache-camel-message-routing/book[Instant
Apache Camel Message Routing]
* http://www.packtpub.com/apache-camel-messaging-system/book[Instant
Apache Camel Messaging System]
* http://www.enterpriseintegrationpatterns.com/[Enterprise Integration
Patterns]

[[Books-CamelinAction2ndedition]]
=== Camel in Action 2nd edition

http://manning.com/ibsen2/[Camel in Action 2nd edition]
by http://davsclaus.blogspot.com/[Claus
Ibsen] and http://janstey.blogspot.com/[Jonathan Anstey]. To be
published by http://www.manning.com/[Manning] in 2017 (writing started
in 2015).

http://manning.com/ibsen2/[image:books/cia2-cover-small.jpg[image]]

http://manning.com/ibsen2/[Camel in Action, Second Edition] is the most
complete Camel book on the market. This updated tutorial is full of
small examples showing how to work with the integration patterns. It
starts with core concepts like sending, receiving, routing, and
transforming data. It then shows you the entire lifecycle and goes in
depth on how to test, deal with errors, scale, deploy, and monitor your
app and even how to build custom tooling-details you can find only in
the Camel code itself. Written by core developers of Camel and the
authors of the first edition, this book distills their experience and
practical insights so that you can tackle integration tasks like a pro.

[[Books-CamelinAction]]
=== Camel in Action

http://www.manning.com/ibsen/[Camel in Action] by
http://davsclaus.blogspot.com/[Claus Ibsen] and
http://janstey.blogspot.com/[Jonathan Anstey]. Published by
http://www.manning.com[Manning] in December 2010.

http://manning.com/ibsen[image:books/cia_small.jpg[image]]

http://manning.com/ibsen[_Camel in Action_] is a Camel tutorial full of
small examples showing how to work with the integration patterns. It
starts with core concepts like sending, receiving, routing, and
transforming data. It then shows you the entire lifecycle and goes in
depth on how to test, deal with errors, scale, deploy, and even monitor
your app—details you can find only in the Camel code itself. Written by
the developers of Camel, this book distills their experience and
practical insights so that you can tackle integration tasks like a pro.

[[Books-ApacheCamelDeveloper'sCookbook]]
=== Apache Camel Developer's Cookbook

http://www.packtpub.com/apache-camel-developers-cookbook/book[Apache
Camel Developer's Cookbook] by http://twitter.com/scottcranton[Scott
Cranton] and http://jakubkorab.net[Jakub Korab]. Published by
http://www.packtpub.com/[Packt publishing] in December 2013.

http://www.packtpub.com/apache-camel-developers-cookbook/book[image:books/CamelCookbookCover.png[image]]

_http://www.packtpub.com/apache-camel-developers-cookbook/book[Apache
Camel Developer's Cookbook]_ is a collection of over 100 how-to recipes
for working with Apache Camel. It is intended for use by busy developers
who may not necessarily have time to learn the whole framework in order
to be productive. It does this without sacrificing any of the detail
needed to build performant, reliable system integrations. Developers new
to Apache Camel will find useful information on how to set up Camel in
both regular Java and Spring-based applications, through to the
ins-and-outs of the various Enterprise Integration Patterns (EIPs) (how
they are affected by multithreading, transactions etc.), payload
transformations and testing. Experienced developers will also benefit
from coverage of parallel and asynchronous processing, error handling
and compensation, transactions and idempotency, monitoring and
debugging, as well as Camel’s support for security. All recipes are
backed by fully unit-tested example code in both the Java and XML DSLs,
all of which is available on github at
http://github.com/CamelCookbook/camel-cookbook-examples[CamelCookbook/camel-cookbook-examples].

[[Books-CamelDesignPatterns]]
=== Camel Design Patterns

https://leanpub.com/camel-design-patterns[Camel Design Patterns] by
http://www.ofbizian.com/[Bilgin Ibryam]. Published by
https://leanpub.com/[LeanPub] in start of 2016.

image:books/large.jpg[image]

Patterns, Principles, and Practices for designing Apache Camel
applications. A developer friendly guide with real world use cases and
practical tips for designing and architecting Apache Camel applications.

There are great books about Apache Camel already, but this book is a
little bit different. Here is why.

Throughout the building of a Camel application, there are many levels of
design decisions to be made. Knowing the Camel framework and the
Enterprise Integration Patterns (EIPs) is a must, but not enough to
architect a real world integration application. Mastering such
applications requires understanding of EIPs, Messaging, Microservices
and SOA principles, and distributed system concepts as a whole.

Driven by real world experiences, this book consolidates most commonly
used patterns and principles for designing Camel applications. For each
pattern, there is a problem description with a context, a proposed
solution, and Camel specifics and tips around the implementation.
Patterns range from individual Camel route design for happy path
scenarios, to error handling and prevention practices, to principles
used in deployment of multiple routes and applications for scalability
and high availability purposes.

[[Books-MasteringApacheCamel]]
=== Mastering Apache Camel

https://www.packtpub.com/application-development/mastering-apache-camel[Mastering
Apache Camel] by https://twitter.com/jbonofre[Jean-Baptiste Onofré].
Published by http://www.packtpub.com/[Packt publishing] in June 2015.

link:books/3151EN_Mastering_Apache_Camel.jpg?version=1&modificationDate=1453112264000&api=v2[image:books/3151EN_Mastering_Apache_Camel.jpg[image]]

This book will provide you with the skills you need to efficiently
create routes using Apache Camel.

After briefly introducing the key features and core concepts of Camel,
the book will take you through all the important features and
components, starting with routing and processors. You will learn how to
use beans in Camel routes, covering everything from supported registries
and annotations, to the creation of an OSGi bundle and writing route
definitions with Blueprint DSL. Leverage the Enterprise Integration
Patterns (EIPs) supported by Camel and implement them in your routes.
You will then see how components and endpoints handle exchanges in
Camel, and how you can use them to create a complete and powerful
mediation framework. You will finally learn how to tackle errors and
perform testing to ensure that your integration projects are working
successfully.

[[Books-ApacheCamelEssentials]]
=== Apache Camel Essentials

https://www.packtpub.com/application-development/apache-camel-essentials[Apache
Camel Essentials] by Prajod Surendran V, Gnanaguru Sattanathan, Naveen
Raj. Published by http://www.packtpub.com/[Packt publishing] in August
2016.

https://www.packtpub.com/application-development/apache-camel-essentials[image:books/B03507_MockupCover_Normal.jpg[image]]

This book offers you a small learning curve to get the most out of
enterprise Camel integrations. At the beginning of the book, you will
learn about the installation and setup of Apache Camel and discover more
about Camel concepts such as the development environment, routing,
deployment strategies, and dependencies. After that, you will learn how
to configure Camel endpoints using DSL and Spring XML, and also learn
how to use Camel for web service integrations. Later on in the book, you
will learn how to execute multiple Camel projects across a wide spectrum
of business use cases. You will round off your Camel journey with
coverage of social media integration and discover the best ways to
implement Camel in your system.

[[Books-InstantApacheCamelMessageRouting]]
=== Instant Apache Camel Message Routing

http://www.packtpub.com/apache-camel-message-routing/book[Instant Apache
Camel Message Routing] by http://ofbizian.com/[Bilgin Ibryam]. Published
by http://www.packtpub.com/[Packt publishing] in August 2013.

http://www.packtpub.com/apache-camel-message-routing/book[image:books/3477OSmall.jpg[image]]

http://www.packtpub.com/apache-camel-message-routing/book[_Instant
Apache Camel Message Routing_] will help you to get started with Camel
and Enterprise Integration Patterns in matter of hours. It is a short,
focused and practical guide to Apache Camel that provides a high level
overview of the Camel architecture and message routing principles. It
introduces a number of integration patterns, complete with diagrams,
common use cases, and examples about how to use them. +
 The book is easy to read and ideal for developers who want to get
started with Camel and message routing quickly.

[[Books-InstantApacheCamelMessagingSystem]]
=== Instant Apache Camel Messaging System

http://www.packtpub.com/apache-camel-messaging-system/book[Instant
Apache Camel Messaging System] by Evgeniy Sharapov. Published by
http://www.packtpub.com/[Packt publishing] in September 2013.

http://www.packtpub.com/apache-camel-messaging-system/book[image:books/5347OSmall.jpg[image]]

http://www.packtpub.com/apache-camel-messaging-system/book[_Instant
Apache Camel Messaging System_] is a practical, hands-on guide that
provides you with step-by-step instructions which will help you to take
advantage of the Apache Camel integration framework using Maven, the
Spring Framework, and the TDD approach.

Instant Apache Camel Messaging System introduces you to Apache Camel and
provides easy-to-follow instructions on how to set up a Maven-based
project and how to use unit tests and mocks to develop your application
in a “test first, code later” manner. This book will help you take
advantage of modern Java development infrastructures including the
Spring Framework, Java DSL, Spring DSL, and Apache Camel to enhance your
application.

[[Books-EnterpriseIntegrationPatterns]]
=== Enterprise Integration Patterns

http://www.enterpriseintegrationpatterns.com/[Enterprise Integration
Patterns] by Gregor Hohpe and Bobby Woolf. Published by Addison Wesley
in October 2003.

http://www.enterpriseintegrationpatterns.com/[image:books/eip_book_cover.jpg[image]]

This is known as the EIP book which distills 65 EIP patterns, which
Apache Camel implements. If you want to learn the EIP patterns better
then this is a great book.

This book provides a consistent vocabulary and visual notation framework
to describe large-scale integration solutions across many technologies.
It also explores in detail the advantages and limitations of
asynchronous messaging architectures. The authors present practical
advice on designing code that connects an application to a messaging
system, and provide extensive information to help you determine when to
send a message, how to route it to the proper destination, and how to
monitor the health of a messaging system. If you want to know how to
manage, monitor, and maintain a messaging system once it is in use, get
this book.
