docs/user-manual/modules/ROOT/pages/camel-4x-upgrade-guide-4_16.adoc, before:

= Apache Camel 4.x Upgrade Guide

This document is for helping you upgrade your Apache Camel application
from Camel 4.x to 4.y. For example, if you are upgrading Camel 4.0 to 4.2, then you should follow the guides
from both 4.0 to 4.1 and 4.1 to 4.2.

[NOTE]
====
https://github.com/apache/camel-upgrade-recipes/[The Camel Upgrade Recipes project] provides automated assistance for some common migration tasks.
Note that manual migration is still required.
See the xref:camel-upgrade-recipes-tool.adoc[documentation] page for details.
====

== Upgrading Camel 4.15 to 4.16

=== camel-infinispan

The `queryBuilder` option on `camel-infinispan` endpoint has been migrated to no longer use the deprecated query factory
`org.infinispan.query.dsl.QueryFactory` to the new query API that is based on ickle query syntax.

This means old code such:

[source,java]
----
    private InfinispanQueryBuilder continuousQueryBuilder
            = qf -> qf.from(User.class).having("name").like("CQ%").build();
----

Should use the https://infinispan.org/docs/stable/titles/query/query.html#ickle-query-language[ickle] query syntax:

[source,java]
----
    private InfinispanQueryBuilder continuousQueryBuilder
            = qf -> qf.query("FROM sample_bank_account.User WHERE name LIKE 'CQ%'");
----

=== camel-milo

The camel-milo component has been upgraded to use Eclipse Milo 1.0.5, which includes several breaking API changes:

==== Certificate Validation API Changes

The certificate validation API has been refactored in Milo 1.0.5:

* The `ServerCertificateValidator` class has been removed
* Use `org.eclipse.milo.opcua.stack.core.security.CertificateValidator` instead
* The new `CertificateValidator` is located in the core security package rather than the server-specific package

If you were programmatically configuring certificate validators, you need to update your code:

[source,java]
----
// Old API (no longer works)
import org.eclipse.milo.opcua.stack.server.security.ServerCertificateValidator;
server.setCertificateValidator(serverCertificateValidator);

// New API (Milo 1.0.5)
import org.eclipse.milo.opcua.stack.core.security.CertificateValidator;
server.setCertificateValidator(certificateValidator);
----

==== Subscription Monitoring API Changes

The monitored item data value listener API has changed:

* The `DataValueListener` now requires two parameters: `OpcUaMonitoredItem` and `DataValue`
* Previously it only accepted a `DataValue` parameter

If you were using custom data value listeners, update your lambda expressions or anonymous classes:

[source,java]
----
// Old API
item.setDataValueListener(dataValue -> processValue(dataValue));

// New API (Milo 1.0.5)
item.setDataValueListener((monitoredItem, dataValue) -> processValue(dataValue));
----

NOTE: Most users will not be affected by these changes as they primarily affect advanced use cases where you directly interact with the Milo API. Standard camel-milo endpoint configurations remain unchanged.

Commit message:

CAMEL-22511: camel-kamelet - Secret options may not be auto RAW() substituted

docs/user-manual/modules/ROOT/pages/camel-4x-upgrade-guide-4_16.adoc, after:

= Apache Camel 4.x Upgrade Guide

This document is for helping you upgrade your Apache Camel application
from Camel 4.x to 4.y. For example, if you are upgrading Camel 4.0 to 4.2, then you should follow the guides
from both 4.0 to 4.1 and 4.1 to 4.2.

[NOTE]
====
https://github.com/apache/camel-upgrade-recipes/[The Camel Upgrade Recipes project] provides automated assistance for some common migration tasks.
Note that manual migration is still required.
See the xref:camel-upgrade-recipes-tool.adoc[documentation] page for details.
====

== Upgrading Camel 4.15 to 4.16

=== camel-kamelet

The kamelet component is now parsing endpoint parameters using _raw mode_ to ensure when using sensitive parameters
such as access keys, passwords etc. they are not URI encoded.

=== camel-infinispan

The `queryBuilder` option on `camel-infinispan` endpoint has been migrated to no longer use the deprecated query factory
`org.infinispan.query.dsl.QueryFactory` to the new query API that is based on ickle query syntax.

This means old code such:

[source,java]
----
    private InfinispanQueryBuilder continuousQueryBuilder
            = qf -> qf.from(User.class).having("name").like("CQ%").build();
----

Should use the https://infinispan.org/docs/stable/titles/query/query.html#ickle-query-language[ickle] query syntax:

[source,java]
----
    private InfinispanQueryBuilder continuousQueryBuilder
            = qf -> qf.query("FROM sample_bank_account.User WHERE name LIKE 'CQ%'");
----

=== camel-milo

The camel-milo component has been upgraded to use Eclipse Milo 1.0.5, which includes several breaking API changes:

==== Certificate Validation API Changes

The certificate validation API has been refactored in Milo 1.0.5:

* The `ServerCertificateValidator` class has been removed
* Use `org.eclipse.milo.opcua.stack.core.security.CertificateValidator` instead
* The new `CertificateValidator` is located in the core security package rather than the server-specific package

If you were programmatically configuring certificate validators, you need to update your code:

[source,java]
----
// Old API (no longer works)
import org.eclipse.milo.opcua.stack.server.security.ServerCertificateValidator;
server.setCertificateValidator(serverCertificateValidator);

// New API (Milo 1.0.5)
import org.eclipse.milo.opcua.stack.core.security.CertificateValidator;
server.setCertificateValidator(certificateValidator);
----

==== Subscription Monitoring API Changes

The monitored item data value listener API has changed:

* The `DataValueListener` now requires two parameters: `OpcUaMonitoredItem` and `DataValue`
* Previously it only accepted a `DataValue` parameter

If you were using custom data value listeners, update your lambda expressions or anonymous classes:

[source,java]
----
// Old API
item.setDataValueListener(dataValue -> processValue(dataValue));

// New API (Milo 1.0.5)
item.setDataValueListener((monitoredItem, dataValue) -> processValue(dataValue));
----

NOTE: Most users will not be affected by these changes as they primarily affect advanced use cases where you directly interact with the Milo API. Standard camel-milo endpoint configurations remain unchanged.
