docs/user-manual/modules/ROOT/pages/camel-4x-upgrade-guide-4_14.adoc, before:

= Apache Camel 4.x Upgrade Guide

This document is for helping you upgrade your Apache Camel application
from Camel 4.x to 4.y. For example, if you are upgrading Camel 4.0 to 4.2, then you should follow the guides
from both 4.0 to 4.1 and 4.1 to 4.2.

[NOTE]
====
https://github.com/apache/camel-upgrade-recipes/[The Camel Upgrade Recipes project] provides automated assistance for some common migration tasks.
Note that manual migration is still required.
See the xref:camel-upgrade-recipes-tool.adoc[documentation] page for details.
====

== Upgrading Camel 4.13 to 4.14

=== camel-core

The `org.apache.camel.spi.ExecutorServiceManager.ThreadFactoryListener` has changed the method signature to include the source,
so the method is changed from `ThreadFactory onNewThreadFactory(ThreadFactory factory)` to `ThreadFactory onNewThreadFactory(Object source, ThreadFactory factory)`

==== Splitter and Multicast EIPs

When using `shareUnitOfWork=true` in Split or Multicast EIPs, then Camel will now use a single shared `UnitOfWork` instance (parent)
for the entire body of work. So if the Splitter is splitting into 1000 sub messages, then each of them will now reuse
the same `UnitOfWork` and any completion tasks that each sub messages, will now be executed later, when the parent `UnitOfWork`
is complete, usually when the original message is completed.

Previously, each sub-message was independent (despite the documentation refers to this not being the case). However this feature
has been mistakenly for many years, as this feature is rarely in use. However, we had the opportunity to look into this as part
of an issue, and felt it's better to fix this before for this LTS release.

=== camel-main

The HTTP server for standalone `camel-main` applications has separated management services and business services.
This means that configurations in `application.properties` should be changed
from `camel.server.xxx` to `camel.management.xxx` as shown below:

|===
|**Old Option** |**New Option**
|camel.server.devConsoleEnabled | camel.management.devConsoleEnabled
|camel.server.healthCheckEnabled | camel.management.healthCheckEnabled
|camel.server.jolokiaEnabled | camel.management.jolokiaEnabled
|camel.server.metricsEnabled | camel.management.metricsEnabled
|camel.server.uploadEnabled | camel.management.uploadEnabled
|camel.server.uploadSourceDir | camel.management.uploadSourceDir
|camel.server.downloadEnabled | camel.management.downloadEnabled
|camel.server.sendEnabled | camel.management.sendEnabled
|camel.server.healthPath | camel.management.healthPath
|camel.server.jolokiaPath | camel.management.jolokiaPath
|===

NOTE: Make sure if you use any of the managed HTTP services such as health-checks then enable the management server with `camel.management.enabled=true`.

The default HTTP endpoints has changed in some management services as listed below:

|===
|**Old Path** |**New Path**
| /q/health | /observe/health
| /q/metrics | /observe/metrics
| /q/info | /observe/info
| /q/jolokia | /observe/jolokia
|===

=== camel-jbang

The `camel-jbang` has upgraded to Java 21 as the default java-version when running and exporting.
To keep using java 17, you can use `--java-version=17` as parameter.

The `camel export` will not include `camel-observabilities-services` out of the box. To include this, then use `--observe` to enable
this during export.

Notice when exporting to kubernetes then `camel-observabilities-services` is always enabled.

When controlling Camel JBang exports with configuration in `application.properties` then
there was a duplicate option (`camel.jbang.repositories` and `camel.jbang.repos`) which has been fixed to
be only `camel.jbang.repos`.

=== camel-google

The scopes parameter for camel-google-calendar, camel-google-calendar-streams, camel-google-drive, camel-google-mail, camel-google-mail-streams and camel-google-sheets-streams has been defined as String instead of Collection<String>. For the migration users will need to, eventually, define scopes as a comma separated list of scopes instead of a Collection instance. For more information the related issue is CAMEL-22247.

=== camel-consul

The nodeMeta and the tags parameter for camel-consul has been defined as String instead of List<String>. For the migration users will need to, eventually, define nodeMeta as a comma separated list of nodeMeta instead of a List or Set instance. For more information the related issue is CAMEL-17339.

=== camel-dapr

The configKeys parameter for camel-dapr has been defined as String instead of List<String>. For the migration users will need to, eventually, define configKeys as a comma separated list of config Keys instead of a List instance. For more information the related issue is CAMEL-17339.

=== camel-huawei-dms

The availableZones parameter for camel-huawei-dms has been defined as String instead of List<String>. For the migration users will need to, eventually, define availableZones as a comma separated list of available zones instead of a List instance. For more information the related issue is CAMEL-17339.

=== camel-weather

The ids parameter for camel-weather has been defined as String instead of List<String>. For the migration users will need to, eventually, define ids as a comma separated list of id instead of a List instance. For more information the related issue is CAMEL-17339.

=== camel-web3j

The addresses, privateFor and Topics parameters for camel-web3j have been defined as String instead of List<String>. For the migration users will need to, eventually, define addresses, privateFor or topics  as a comma separated list of addresses, privateFor or topics instead of a List instance. For more information the related issue is CAMEL-17339.

=== camel-spring-batch

The `jobLauncher` and `jobRegistry` is now autowired on the component if there is a single instance pre-configured in the application.
This avoids having to wire this into the Camel component or endpoints.

Commit message:

CAMEL-22511: camel-kamelet - Secret options may not be auto RAW() substituted

docs/user-manual/modules/ROOT/pages/camel-4x-upgrade-guide-4_14.adoc, after:

= Apache Camel 4.x Upgrade Guide

This document is for helping you upgrade your Apache Camel application
from Camel 4.x to 4.y. For example, if you are upgrading Camel 4.0 to 4.2, then you should follow the guides
from both 4.0 to 4.1 and 4.1 to 4.2.

[NOTE]
====
https://github.com/apache/camel-upgrade-recipes/[The Camel Upgrade Recipes project] provides automated assistance for some common migration tasks.
Note that manual migration is still required.
See the xref:camel-upgrade-recipes-tool.adoc[documentation] page for details.
====

== Upgrading from 4.14.1 to 4.14.2

=== camel-kamelet

The kamelet component is now parsing endpoint parameters using _raw mode_ to ensure when using sensitive parameters
such as access keys, passwords etc. they are not URI encoded.

== Upgrading from 4.10.0 to 4.10.1

No changes

== Upgrading Camel 4.13 to 4.14

=== camel-core

The `org.apache.camel.spi.ExecutorServiceManager.ThreadFactoryListener` has changed the method signature to include the source,
so the method is changed from `ThreadFactory onNewThreadFactory(ThreadFactory factory)` to `ThreadFactory onNewThreadFactory(Object source, ThreadFactory factory)`

==== Splitter and Multicast EIPs

When using `shareUnitOfWork=true` in Split or Multicast EIPs, then Camel will now use a single shared `UnitOfWork` instance (parent)
for the entire body of work. So if the Splitter is splitting into 1000 sub messages, then each of them will now reuse
the same `UnitOfWork` and any completion tasks that each sub messages, will now be executed later, when the parent `UnitOfWork`
is complete, usually when the original message is completed.

Previously, each sub-message was independent (despite the documentation refers to this not being the case). However this feature
has been mistakenly for many years, as this feature is rarely in use. However, we had the opportunity to look into this as part
of an issue, and felt it's better to fix this before for this LTS release.

=== camel-main

The HTTP server for standalone `camel-main` applications has separated management services and business services.
This means that configurations in `application.properties` should be changed
from `camel.server.xxx` to `camel.management.xxx` as shown below:

|===
|**Old Option** |**New Option**
|camel.server.devConsoleEnabled | camel.management.devConsoleEnabled
|camel.server.healthCheckEnabled | camel.management.healthCheckEnabled
|camel.server.jolokiaEnabled | camel.management.jolokiaEnabled
|camel.server.metricsEnabled | camel.management.metricsEnabled
|camel.server.uploadEnabled | camel.management.uploadEnabled
|camel.server.uploadSourceDir | camel.management.uploadSourceDir
|camel.server.downloadEnabled | camel.management.downloadEnabled
|camel.server.sendEnabled | camel.management.sendEnabled
|camel.server.healthPath | camel.management.healthPath
|camel.server.jolokiaPath | camel.management.jolokiaPath
|===

NOTE: Make sure if you use any of the managed HTTP services such as health-checks then enable the management server with `camel.management.enabled=true`.

The default HTTP endpoints has changed in some management services as listed below:

|===
|**Old Path** |**New Path**
| /q/health | /observe/health
| /q/metrics | /observe/metrics
| /q/info | /observe/info
| /q/jolokia | /observe/jolokia
|===

=== camel-jbang

The `camel-jbang` has upgraded to Java 21 as the default java-version when running and exporting.
To keep using java 17, you can use `--java-version=17` as parameter.

The `camel export` will not include `camel-observabilities-services` out of the box. To include this, then use `--observe` to enable
this during export.

Notice when exporting to kubernetes then `camel-observabilities-services` is always enabled.

When controlling Camel JBang exports with configuration in `application.properties` then
there was a duplicate option (`camel.jbang.repositories` and `camel.jbang.repos`) which has been fixed to
be only `camel.jbang.repos`.

=== camel-google

The scopes parameter for camel-google-calendar, camel-google-calendar-streams, camel-google-drive, camel-google-mail, camel-google-mail-streams and camel-google-sheets-streams has been defined as String instead of Collection<String>. For the migration users will need to, eventually, define scopes as a comma separated list of scopes instead of a Collection instance. For more information the related issue is CAMEL-22247.

=== camel-consul

The nodeMeta and the tags parameter for camel-consul has been defined as String instead of List<String>. For the migration users will need to, eventually, define nodeMeta as a comma separated list of nodeMeta instead of a List or Set instance. For more information the related issue is CAMEL-17339.

=== camel-dapr

The configKeys parameter for camel-dapr has been defined as String instead of List<String>. For the migration users will need to, eventually, define configKeys as a comma separated list of config Keys instead of a List instance. For more information the related issue is CAMEL-17339.

=== camel-huawei-dms

The availableZones parameter for camel-huawei-dms has been defined as String instead of List<String>. For the migration users will need to, eventually, define availableZones as a comma separated list of available zones instead of a List instance. For more information the related issue is CAMEL-17339.

=== camel-weather

The ids parameter for camel-weather has been defined as String instead of List<String>. For the migration users will need to, eventually, define ids as a comma separated list of id instead of a List instance. For more information the related issue is CAMEL-17339.

=== camel-web3j

The addresses, privateFor and Topics parameters for camel-web3j have been defined as String instead of List<String>. For the migration users will need to, eventually, define addresses, privateFor or topics  as a comma separated list of addresses, privateFor or topics instead of a List instance. For more information the related issue is CAMEL-17339.

=== camel-spring-batch

The `jobLauncher` and `jobRegistry` is now autowired on the component if there is a single instance pre-configured in the application.
This avoids having to wire this into the Camel component or endpoints.
