docs/user-manual/modules/ROOT/pages/camel-4x-upgrade-guide-4_9.adoc, before:

= Apache Camel 4.x Upgrade Guide

This document is for helping you upgrade your Apache Camel application
from Camel 4.x to 4.y. For example, if you are upgrading Camel 4.0 to 4.2, then you should follow the guides
from both 4.0 to 4.1 and 4.1 to 4.2.

== Upgrading Camel 4.8 to 4.9

=== camel-api

Added `setLazyBeanStrategy`/`getLazyBeanStrategy` methods to `org.apache.camel.spi.CamelBeanPostProcessor`.

Renamed `Exchange.ACTIVE_SPAN` to `Exchange.OTEL_ACTIVE_SPAN`.
Renamed `ExchangePropertyKey.ACTIVE_SPAN` to `ExchangePropertyKey.OTEL_ACTIVE_SPAN`.

=== camel-management

The `queueSize` attribute on endpoints which are `ManagedBrowseableEndpoint` is changed from returning a `Long` value
to an `Integer` value.

=== camel-jackson

The option `useWriter` on JSon data format and camel-jackson,
has been replaced with `combineUnicodeSurrogates` as it is intended for 4-bytes characters such as Japanese.

=== camel-jms

The camel-jms component has changed its default `HeaderFilterStrategy` to also remove any `Camel...` headers,
to act similar to other Camel components. If the old classic behavior is needed then you can configure the `JmsComponent` to use `org.apache.camel.component.jms.ClassicJmsHeaderFilterStrategy`
as header filter strategy which is the old implementation.

Added `int limit` as parameter to the `browse` method in `org.apache.camel.component.jms.QueueBrowseStrategy`.

=== camel-opentelemetry

The `camel-opentelemetry` component has had significant bug fixes to handle span activation/deactivations
better when Camel route messages synchronously and asynchronously. This component should also work better
on Spring Boot.

=== camel-smooks

Upgraded Smooks from 2.0.0-RC4 to 2.0.1 which has
https://www.smooks.org/documentation/#migrating_from_smooks_1_7_to_2_0[API breaking changes] in Smooks.

=== camel-hashicorp-vault properties function

The syntax for retrieving a single field of a secret has been changed.

From this

`{{hashicorp:secret:database/username}}`

to this

`{{hashicorp:secret:database#username}}`

You could find more details on CAMEL-21179 issue

=== camel-aws-secrets-manager properties function

The syntax for retrieving a single field of a secret has been changed.

From this

`{{aws:database/username}}`

to this

`{{aws:database#username}}`

You could find more details on CAMEL-21179 issue

=== camel-google-secret-manager properties function

The syntax for retrieving a single field of a secret has been changed.

From this

`{{gcp:database/username}}`

to this

`{{gcp:database#username}}`

You could find more details on CAMEL-21179 issue

=== camel-azure-key-vault properties function

The syntax for retrieving a single field of a secret has been changed.

From this

`{{azure:database/username}}`

to this

`{{azure:database#username}}`

You could find more details on CAMEL-21179 issue

=== camel-aws

The `camel-aws2-s3` when using `headBucket` operation will now store the result
in a header named `CamelAwsS3BucketExists` whether the bucket exists or not.

Previously an `software.amazon.awssdk.services.s3.model.NoSuchBucketException` was thrown,
however this would require to use error handling to just check whether the bucket existed.
Returning a boolean makes it easier in Camel routes to decide what to do.
You may also set the option `ignoreBody=true` to not change the message body.

=== camel-test

The `CamelTestSupport` class was modified so that the JUnit 5 extension code that was part of the class itself,
was moved to a separate class. This is part of the work being done on https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/CAMEL-20837[CAMEL-20837]
to modernize the base test code.

In many cases, code should work with no changes provided they are not using any of the API methods that
were deprecated in Camel 4.7.0.
Additionally, starting with Camel 4.9, we strongly recommend users to avoid relying on single-instance contexts (created
via `@TestInstance(TestInstance.Lifecycle.PER_CLASS)`), as this is considered a deprecated functionality that will be removed in the
future.
The logs will print a warning message if this behavior is detected.

=== Removed deprecated components

The following experimental DSL has been removed:

- `camel-groovy-dsl`
- `camel-js-dsl`
- `camel-jsh-dsl`

The Camel team is only focusing on Java, XML and YAML DSL.

=== Removed API

==== Kotlin DSL

The Kotlin DSL which was deprecated in Camel 4.7.0 has now been removed. The routes must be migrated to another DSL such as Java, Yaml or xml.

The following modules has been removed:

* camel-kotlin-dsl
* camel-kotlin-api

Commit message:

CAMEL-21395: camel-debezium - Add a note to the upgrade guide (#16112)

docs/user-manual/modules/ROOT/pages/camel-4x-upgrade-guide-4_9.adoc, after:

= Apache Camel 4.x Upgrade Guide

This document is for helping you upgrade your Apache Camel application
from Camel 4.x to 4.y. For example, if you are upgrading Camel 4.0 to 4.2, then you should follow the guides
from both 4.0 to 4.1 and 4.1 to 4.2.

== Upgrading Camel 4.8 to 4.9

=== camel-api

Added `setLazyBeanStrategy`/`getLazyBeanStrategy` methods to `org.apache.camel.spi.CamelBeanPostProcessor`.

Renamed `Exchange.ACTIVE_SPAN` to `Exchange.OTEL_ACTIVE_SPAN`.
Renamed `ExchangePropertyKey.ACTIVE_SPAN` to `ExchangePropertyKey.OTEL_ACTIVE_SPAN`.

=== camel-management

The `queueSize` attribute on endpoints which are `ManagedBrowseableEndpoint` is changed from returning a `Long` value
to an `Integer` value.

=== camel-jackson

The option `useWriter` on JSon data format and camel-jackson,
has been replaced with `combineUnicodeSurrogates` as it is intended for 4-bytes characters such as Japanese.

=== camel-jms

The camel-jms component has changed its default `HeaderFilterStrategy` to also remove any `Camel...` headers,
to act similar to other Camel components. If the old classic behavior is needed then you can configure the `JmsComponent` to use `org.apache.camel.component.jms.ClassicJmsHeaderFilterStrategy`
as header filter strategy which is the old implementation.

Added `int limit` as parameter to the `browse` method in `org.apache.camel.component.jms.QueueBrowseStrategy`.

=== camel-opentelemetry

The `camel-opentelemetry` component has had significant bug fixes to handle span activation/deactivations
better when Camel route messages synchronously and asynchronously. This component should also work better
on Spring Boot.

=== camel-smooks

Upgraded Smooks from 2.0.0-RC4 to 2.0.1 which has
https://www.smooks.org/documentation/#migrating_from_smooks_1_7_to_2_0[API breaking changes] in Smooks.

=== camel-hashicorp-vault properties function

The syntax for retrieving a single field of a secret has been changed.

From this

`{{hashicorp:secret:database/username}}`

to this

`{{hashicorp:secret:database#username}}`

You could find more details on CAMEL-21179 issue

=== camel-aws-secrets-manager properties function

The syntax for retrieving a single field of a secret has been changed.

From this

`{{aws:database/username}}`

to this

`{{aws:database#username}}`

You could find more details on CAMEL-21179 issue

=== camel-google-secret-manager properties function

The syntax for retrieving a single field of a secret has been changed.

From this

`{{gcp:database/username}}`

to this

`{{gcp:database#username}}`

You could find more details on CAMEL-21179 issue

=== camel-azure-key-vault properties function

The syntax for retrieving a single field of a secret has been changed.

From this

`{{azure:database/username}}`

to this

`{{azure:database#username}}`

You could find more details on CAMEL-21179 issue

=== camel-aws

The `camel-aws2-s3` when using `headBucket` operation will now store the result
in a header named `CamelAwsS3BucketExists` whether the bucket exists or not.

Previously an `software.amazon.awssdk.services.s3.model.NoSuchBucketException` was thrown,
however this would require to use error handling to just check whether the bucket existed.
Returning a boolean makes it easier in Camel routes to decide what to do.
You may also set the option `ignoreBody=true` to not change the message body.

=== camel-test

The `CamelTestSupport` class was modified so that the JUnit 5 extension code that was part of the class itself,
was moved to a separate class. This is part of the work being done on https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/CAMEL-20837[CAMEL-20837]
to modernize the base test code.

In many cases, code should work with no changes provided they are not using any of the API methods that
were deprecated in Camel 4.7.0.
Additionally, starting with Camel 4.9, we strongly recommend users to avoid relying on single-instance contexts (created
via `@TestInstance(TestInstance.Lifecycle.PER_CLASS)`), as this is considered a deprecated functionality that will be removed in the
future.
The logs will print a warning message if this behavior is detected.

=== camel-debezium

To avoid split package that can be a problem in environments like OSGI, each camel-debezium module has its own
sub package corresponding to the database type. So for example, all the classes of the module `camel-debezium-postgres`
have been moved to a dedicated package which is `org.apache.camel.component.debezium.postgres` instead of having
everything under the root package `org.apache.camel.component.debezium`.

=== Removed deprecated components

The following experimental DSL has been removed:

- `camel-groovy-dsl`
- `camel-js-dsl`
- `camel-jsh-dsl`

The Camel team is only focusing on Java, XML and YAML DSL.

=== Removed API

==== Kotlin DSL

The Kotlin DSL which was deprecated in Camel 4.7.0 has now been removed. The routes must be migrated to another DSL such as Java, Yaml or xml.

The following modules has been removed:

* camel-kotlin-dsl
* camel-kotlin-api
