docs/user-manual/modules/ROOT/pages/camel-4x-upgrade-guide-4_18.adoc, before:

= Apache Camel 4.x Upgrade Guide

This document is for helping you upgrade your Apache Camel application
from Camel 4.x to 4.y. For example, if you are upgrading Camel 4.0 to 4.2, then you should follow the guides
from both 4.0 to 4.1 and 4.1 to 4.2.

[NOTE]
====
https://github.com/apache/camel-upgrade-recipes/[The Camel Upgrade Recipes project] provides automated assistance for some common migration tasks.
Note that manual migration is still required.
See the xref:camel-upgrade-recipes-tool.adoc[documentation] page for details.
====

== Upgrading Camel 4.17 to 4.18

=== camel-simple

The *simple* language has deprecated binary operators that uses space in the name:

- `not contains` use `!contains` instead
- `not regex` use `!regex` instead
- `not range` use `!range` instead
- `starts with` use `startsWith` instead
- `ends with` use `endsWith` instead

=== camel-file

The `org.apache.camel.component.file.GenericFileOperations` has added method `storeFileDirectly`.

=== camel-docling

All not working metadata headers have been removed.
The option `extractAllMetadata` has been removed. Using `includeRawMetadata` will have the same effect given that there is no more `customMetadata` available.

It corresponds to the removal of functionality no more working since 4.17. Given that this functionality was never available in a LTS version,that the next LST version is the next one and the fix requires important change in upstream dependency; it is not going through a deprecation phase and removed directly.

=== Component deprecation

The `camel-olingo2` and `camel-olingo4` component are deprecated.
This is due the Apache Olingo project is EOL and has been moved to the attic and is no longer maintained.

Commit message:

Adapt to API break in eclipse Tahu 1.0.18
https://github.com/eclipse-tahu/tahu/commit/7ab13e47204af377403df59682001f488f5f9591
introduced an API break.

HostApplicationEventHandler has been renamed to
MultiHostApplicationEventHandler and introduced one more parameter on
all methods.

Even if the interface HostApplicationEventHandler is public, I do not
expect Camel users to use this class and the change would be relatively
trivial, so replacing it without deprecating it first in order to be
able to use the latest Tahu version right away.

Signed-off-by: Aurélien Pupier <apupier@ibm.com>

docs/user-manual/modules/ROOT/pages/camel-4x-upgrade-guide-4_18.adoc, after:

= Apache Camel 4.x Upgrade Guide

This document is for helping you upgrade your Apache Camel application
from Camel 4.x to 4.y. For example, if you are upgrading Camel 4.0 to 4.2, then you should follow the guides
from both 4.0 to 4.1 and 4.1 to 4.2.

[NOTE]
====
https://github.com/apache/camel-upgrade-recipes/[The Camel Upgrade Recipes project] provides automated assistance for some common migration tasks.
Note that manual migration is still required.
See the xref:camel-upgrade-recipes-tool.adoc[documentation] page for details.
====

== Upgrading Camel 4.17 to 4.18

=== camel-simple

The *simple* language has deprecated binary operators that uses space in the name:

- `not contains` use `!contains` instead
- `not regex` use `!regex` instead
- `not range` use `!range` instead
- `starts with` use `startsWith` instead
- `ends with` use `endsWith` instead

=== camel-file

The `org.apache.camel.component.file.GenericFileOperations` has added method `storeFileDirectly`.

=== camel-docling

All not working metadata headers have been removed.
The option `extractAllMetadata` has been removed. Using `includeRawMetadata` will have the same effect given that there is no more `customMetadata` available.

It corresponds to the removal of functionality no more working since 4.17. Given that this functionality was never available in a LTS version,that the next LST version is the next one and the fix requires important change in upstream dependency; it is not going through a deprecation phase and removed directly.

=== camel-tahu

The upgrade of Tahu from 1.0.17 to 1.0.18 introduced an API break. HostApplicationEventHandler has been renamed to MultiHostApplicationEventHandler and introduced one more parameter on all methods.

Even if the interface HostApplicationEventHandler is public, I do not expect Camel users to use the implementation TahuHostApplicationEventHandler from Camel. Also the change would be relatively trivial. So replacing it without deprecating it first in order to be able to use the latest Tahu version right away.

Consequently, there is an API break `org.apache.camel.tahu.handlers.TahuHostApplicationEventHandler` has been removed. It is replaced by `org.apache.camel.tahu.handlers.MultiTahuHostApplicationEventHandler`.

=== Component deprecation

The `camel-olingo2` and `camel-olingo4` component are deprecated.
This is due the Apache Olingo project is EOL and has been moved to the attic and is no longer maintained.
