docs/user-manual/modules/ROOT/pages/camel-4x-upgrade-guide-4_11.adoc, before:

= Apache Camel 4.x Upgrade Guide

This document is for helping you upgrade your Apache Camel application
from Camel 4.x to 4.y. For example, if you are upgrading Camel 4.0 to 4.2, then you should follow the guides
from both 4.0 to 4.1 and 4.1 to 4.2.

== Upgrading Camel 4.10 to 4.11

=== file based components

The file based component such as `camel-file`, `camel-ftp`, `camel-smb`, and `camel-azure-files` has
been improved to allow optimized dynamic poll when using dynamic `fileName` header.

This change means that there is a new `DynamicPollingConsumer` API the consumer implements.
And as such some APIs inside these components has been changed.

This will only affect if you have built your own custom Camel component on top of `camel-file`.
And if so, your custom code may need to be changed slightly as well.

=== camel-ftp

The file name header `Exchange.FILE_NAME` now includes the relative path such as `subdir/hello.txt`
when using `recursive=true`, to be similar to how `camel-file` component behaves.

Commit message:

Remove lightweight option that are not in use

docs/user-manual/modules/ROOT/pages/camel-4x-upgrade-guide-4_11.adoc, after:

= Apache Camel 4.x Upgrade Guide

This document is for helping you upgrade your Apache Camel application
from Camel 4.x to 4.y. For example, if you are upgrading Camel 4.0 to 4.2, then you should follow the guides
from both 4.0 to 4.1 and 4.1 to 4.2.

== Upgrading Camel 4.10 to 4.11

=== camel-main

Remove the deprecated `camel.main.lightweight` option that was not in use.

=== file based components

The file based component such as `camel-file`, `camel-ftp`, `camel-smb`, and `camel-azure-files` has
been improved to allow optimized dynamic poll when using dynamic `fileName` header.

This change means that there is a new `DynamicPollingConsumer` API the consumer implements.
And as such some APIs inside these components has been changed.

This will only affect if you have built your own custom Camel component on top of `camel-file`.
And if so, your custom code may need to be changed slightly as well.

=== camel-ftp

The file name header `Exchange.FILE_NAME` now includes the relative path such as `subdir/hello.txt`
when using `recursive=true`, to be similar to how `camel-file` component behaves.
