docs/user-manual/modules/ROOT/pages/camel-jbang-mcp.adoc, before:

= Camel MCP Server

The Camel MCP Server exposes the Apache Camel Catalog and a set of specialized tools through the
https://modelcontextprotocol.io/[Model Context Protocol (MCP)], the open standard that allows AI coding assistants
to call external tools. This enables AI tools such as Claude Code, OpenAI Codex, GitHub Copilot, and JetBrains AI
to query live Camel catalog data, validate endpoint URIs, analyze routes for security concerns, browse Kamelets, and more.

The server is built on https://quarkus.io/[Quarkus] using the
https://docs.quarkiverse.io/quarkus-mcp-server/dev/index.html[quarkus-mcp-server] extension and ships as a single
uber-JAR that can be launched via https://www.jbang.dev/[JBang].

NOTE: This module is in *Preview* status as of Camel 4.18.

== Transport

The server supports two transports:

* **STDIO** -- The default transport for CLI-based AI tools. The server communicates over stdin/stdout using the MCP
  protocol. All logging goes to stderr to keep stdout clean for protocol messages.
* **HTTP/SSE** -- An optional transport for web-based clients and remote access scenarios. Useful when running the
  MCP server as a shared service for a team or in a container.

By default, the HTTP server is disabled. To enable it, set `quarkus.http.host-enabled=true`.

== Available Tools

The server exposes 15 tools organized into six functional areas.

=== Catalog Exploration

[cols="1,3",options="header"]
|===
| Tool | Description

| `camel_catalog_components`
| List available Camel components with filtering by name, label (e.g., `messaging`, `cloud`, `database`), and
  runtime type (`main`, `spring-boot`, `quarkus`). Supports querying specific Camel versions.

| `camel_catalog_component_doc`
| Get detailed documentation for a specific component including all endpoint options, component-level options,
  Maven coordinates, and URI syntax.

| `camel_catalog_dataformats`
| List available data formats (JSON, XML, CSV, Avro, Protobuf, and others).

| `camel_catalog_dataformat_doc`
| Get detailed documentation for a specific data format including all configuration options, Maven coordinates,
  and model information.

| `camel_catalog_languages`
| List expression languages (Simple, JsonPath, XPath, JQ, Groovy, and others).

| `camel_catalog_language_doc`
| Get detailed documentation for a specific expression language including all configuration options and
  Maven coordinates.

| `camel_catalog_eips`
| List Enterprise Integration Patterns with filtering by category.

| `camel_catalog_eip_doc`
| Get detailed documentation for a specific EIP including all its options.
|===

=== Kamelet Catalog

[cols="1,3",options="header"]
|===
| Tool | Description

| `camel_catalog_kamelets`
| List available Kamelets from the Kamelet Catalog with filtering by name, description, and type (`source`, `sink`,
  `action`). Supports querying specific Kamelets catalog versions.

| `camel_catalog_kamelet_doc`
| Get detailed documentation for a specific Kamelet including all properties/options, their types, defaults,
  examples, and the Kamelet's Maven dependencies.
|===

=== Route Understanding

[cols="1,3",options="header"]
|===
| Tool | Description

| `camel_route_context`
| Given a Camel route (YAML, XML, or Java DSL), extracts all components and EIPs used, looks up their documentation
  from the catalog, and returns structured context.
|===

=== Security Analysis

[cols="1,3",options="header"]
|===
| Tool | Description

| `camel_route_harden_context`
| Analyzes a route for security concerns. Identifies security-sensitive components, assigns risk levels, detects
  issues like hardcoded credentials or plain-text protocols, and returns structured security findings alongside
  best practices.
|===

=== Validation and Transformation

[cols="1,3",options="header"]
|===
| Tool | Description

| `camel_validate_route`
| Validates Camel endpoint URIs against the catalog schema. Catches unknown options, missing required parameters,
  invalid enum values, and type mismatches. Also provides suggestions for misspelled option names.

| `camel_transform_route`
| Assists with route DSL format transformation between YAML and XML.
|===

=== Version Management

[cols="1,3",options="header"]
|===
| Tool | Description

| `camel_version_list`
| Lists available Camel versions for a given runtime, including release dates, JDK requirements, and LTS status.
|===

== Setup

The MCP server requires https://www.jbang.dev/[JBang] to be installed and available on your PATH.

=== Claude Code

Add the following to your project's `.mcp.json` (or `~/.claude/mcp.json` for global configuration):

[source,json]
----
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "camel": {
      "command": "jbang",
      "args": [
        "-Dquarkus.log.level=WARN",
        "org.apache.camel:camel-jbang-mcp:4.18.0:runner"
      ]
    }
  }
}
----

=== OpenAI Codex

Add the server to your MCP configuration:

[source,json]
----
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "camel": {
      "command": "jbang",
      "args": [
        "-Dquarkus.log.level=WARN",
        "org.apache.camel:camel-jbang-mcp:4.18.0:runner"
      ]
    }
  }
}
----

=== VS Code with Copilot

Configure MCP servers in your `.vscode/mcp.json` or in the user settings:

[source,json]
----
{
  "servers": {
    "camel": {
      "command": "jbang",
      "args": [
        "-Dquarkus.log.level=WARN",
        "org.apache.camel:camel-jbang-mcp:4.18.0:runner"
      ]
    }
  }
}
----

=== JetBrains IDEs

JetBrains IDEs support MCP servers starting from 2025.1. Configure them in
Settings > Tools > AI Assistant > MCP Servers, or create an `.junie/mcp.json` file in your project root:

[source,json]
----
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "camel": {
      "command": "jbang",
      "args": [
        "-Dquarkus.log.level=WARN",
        "org.apache.camel:camel-jbang-mcp:4.18.0:runner"
      ]
    }
  }
}
----

=== Generic STDIO Client

Any MCP client that supports the STDIO transport can launch the server directly:

[source,bash]
----
jbang org.apache.camel:camel-jbang-mcp:4.18.0:runner
----

=== HTTP/SSE Transport

To start the server with the HTTP/SSE transport enabled:

[source,bash]
----
jbang -Dquarkus.http.host-enabled=true -Dquarkus.http.port=8080 org.apache.camel:camel-jbang-mcp:4.18.0:runner
----

MCP clients that support HTTP/SSE can then connect to the server at `http://localhost:8080/mcp/sse`.

== Examples

=== Listing Components

Prompt your AI assistant with:

----
List all Camel components in the messaging category
----

The assistant calls `camel_catalog_components` with `label=messaging` and receives structured results with name,
title, description, label, deprecation status, and support level for each matching component.

=== Getting Component Documentation

----
Show me the documentation for the Kafka component, including all endpoint options
----

The assistant calls `camel_catalog_component_doc` with `component=kafka` and receives the full component model
including the URI syntax, Maven coordinates, and every endpoint option with types, defaults, and descriptions.

=== Browsing Kamelets

----
Show me all available source kamelets related to AWS
----

The assistant calls `camel_catalog_kamelets` with `type=source` and `filter=aws` and returns matching Kamelets
with their name, type, support level, and description.

To drill into a specific Kamelet:

----
What options does the aws-s3-source kamelet accept?
----

The assistant calls `camel_catalog_kamelet_doc` with `kamelet=aws-s3-source` and returns the complete property
list including required fields, types, defaults, and Maven dependencies.

=== Validating an Endpoint URI

----
Validate this Kafka endpoint: kafka:myTopic?brkers=localhost:9092&groupId=myGroup
----

The assistant calls `camel_validate_route` and detects the typo (`brkers`), reports the URI as invalid, and
suggests the correct option name (`brokers`).

=== Understanding a Route

Paste a route and ask:

----
Explain what this route does
----

The assistant calls `camel_route_context` which extracts all components and EIPs used in the route, looks up
their documentation from the catalog, and returns enriched context so the AI can provide an accurate explanation.

=== Security Hardening

----
Analyze this route for security concerns and suggest hardening measures
----

The assistant calls `camel_route_harden_context` which analyzes the route for security-sensitive components,
detects issues (hardcoded credentials, HTTP instead of HTTPS, plain FTP, etc.), assigns risk levels, and
returns structured findings with remediation recommendations.

=== Checking Camel Versions

----
What are the latest LTS versions of Camel for Spring Boot?
----

The assistant calls `camel_version_list` with `runtime=spring-boot` and `lts=true` and returns version
information including release dates, end-of-life dates, and JDK requirements.

Commit message:

CAMEL-22985 - camel-jbang-mcp - Add tool for yaml-dsl-validator
Signed-off-by: Andrea Cosentino <ancosen@gmail.com>

docs/user-manual/modules/ROOT/pages/camel-jbang-mcp.adoc, after:

= Camel MCP Server

The Camel MCP Server exposes the Apache Camel Catalog and a set of specialized tools through the
https://modelcontextprotocol.io/[Model Context Protocol (MCP)], the open standard that allows AI coding assistants
to call external tools. This enables AI tools such as Claude Code, OpenAI Codex, GitHub Copilot, and JetBrains AI
to query live Camel catalog data, validate endpoint URIs, analyze routes for security concerns, browse Kamelets, and more.

The server is built on https://quarkus.io/[Quarkus] using the
https://docs.quarkiverse.io/quarkus-mcp-server/dev/index.html[quarkus-mcp-server] extension and ships as a single
uber-JAR that can be launched via https://www.jbang.dev/[JBang].

NOTE: This module is in *Preview* status as of Camel 4.18.

== Transport

The server supports two transports:

* **STDIO** -- The default transport for CLI-based AI tools. The server communicates over stdin/stdout using the MCP
  protocol. All logging goes to stderr to keep stdout clean for protocol messages.
* **HTTP/SSE** -- An optional transport for web-based clients and remote access scenarios. Useful when running the
  MCP server as a shared service for a team or in a container.

By default, the HTTP server is disabled. To enable it, set `quarkus.http.host-enabled=true`.

== Available Tools

The server exposes 16 tools organized into six functional areas.

=== Catalog Exploration

[cols="1,3",options="header"]
|===
| Tool | Description

| `camel_catalog_components`
| List available Camel components with filtering by name, label (e.g., `messaging`, `cloud`, `database`), and
  runtime type (`main`, `spring-boot`, `quarkus`). Supports querying specific Camel versions.

| `camel_catalog_component_doc`
| Get detailed documentation for a specific component including all endpoint options, component-level options,
  Maven coordinates, and URI syntax.

| `camel_catalog_dataformats`
| List available data formats (JSON, XML, CSV, Avro, Protobuf, and others).

| `camel_catalog_dataformat_doc`
| Get detailed documentation for a specific data format including all configuration options, Maven coordinates,
  and model information.

| `camel_catalog_languages`
| List expression languages (Simple, JsonPath, XPath, JQ, Groovy, and others).

| `camel_catalog_language_doc`
| Get detailed documentation for a specific expression language including all configuration options and
  Maven coordinates.

| `camel_catalog_eips`
| List Enterprise Integration Patterns with filtering by category.

| `camel_catalog_eip_doc`
| Get detailed documentation for a specific EIP including all its options.
|===

=== Kamelet Catalog

[cols="1,3",options="header"]
|===
| Tool | Description

| `camel_catalog_kamelets`
| List available Kamelets from the Kamelet Catalog with filtering by name, description, and type (`source`, `sink`,
  `action`). Supports querying specific Kamelets catalog versions.

| `camel_catalog_kamelet_doc`
| Get detailed documentation for a specific Kamelet including all properties/options, their types, defaults,
  examples, and the Kamelet's Maven dependencies.
|===

=== Route Understanding

[cols="1,3",options="header"]
|===
| Tool | Description

| `camel_route_context`
| Given a Camel route (YAML, XML, or Java DSL), extracts all components and EIPs used, looks up their documentation
  from the catalog, and returns structured context.
|===

=== Security Analysis

[cols="1,3",options="header"]
|===
| Tool | Description

| `camel_route_harden_context`
| Analyzes a route for security concerns. Identifies security-sensitive components, assigns risk levels, detects
  issues like hardcoded credentials or plain-text protocols, and returns structured security findings alongside
  best practices.
|===

=== Validation and Transformation

[cols="1,3",options="header"]
|===
| Tool | Description

| `camel_validate_route`
| Validates Camel endpoint URIs against the catalog schema. Catches unknown options, missing required parameters,
  invalid enum values, and type mismatches. Also provides suggestions for misspelled option names.

| `camel_validate_yaml_dsl`
| Validates a YAML DSL route definition against the Camel YAML DSL JSON schema. Checks for valid DSL elements,
  correct route structure, and returns detailed schema validation errors including instance path, error type,
  and schema path.

| `camel_transform_route`
| Assists with route DSL format transformation between YAML and XML.
|===

=== Version Management

[cols="1,3",options="header"]
|===
| Tool | Description

| `camel_version_list`
| Lists available Camel versions for a given runtime, including release dates, JDK requirements, and LTS status.
|===

== Setup

The MCP server requires https://www.jbang.dev/[JBang] to be installed and available on your PATH.

=== Claude Code

Add the following to your project's `.mcp.json` (or `~/.claude/mcp.json` for global configuration):

[source,json]
----
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "camel": {
      "command": "jbang",
      "args": [
        "-Dquarkus.log.level=WARN",
        "org.apache.camel:camel-jbang-mcp:4.18.0:runner"
      ]
    }
  }
}
----

=== OpenAI Codex

Add the server to your MCP configuration:

[source,json]
----
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "camel": {
      "command": "jbang",
      "args": [
        "-Dquarkus.log.level=WARN",
        "org.apache.camel:camel-jbang-mcp:4.18.0:runner"
      ]
    }
  }
}
----

=== VS Code with Copilot

Configure MCP servers in your `.vscode/mcp.json` or in the user settings:

[source,json]
----
{
  "servers": {
    "camel": {
      "command": "jbang",
      "args": [
        "-Dquarkus.log.level=WARN",
        "org.apache.camel:camel-jbang-mcp:4.18.0:runner"
      ]
    }
  }
}
----

=== JetBrains IDEs

JetBrains IDEs support MCP servers starting from 2025.1. Configure them in
Settings > Tools > AI Assistant > MCP Servers, or create an `.junie/mcp.json` file in your project root:

[source,json]
----
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "camel": {
      "command": "jbang",
      "args": [
        "-Dquarkus.log.level=WARN",
        "org.apache.camel:camel-jbang-mcp:4.18.0:runner"
      ]
    }
  }
}
----

=== Generic STDIO Client

Any MCP client that supports the STDIO transport can launch the server directly:

[source,bash]
----
jbang org.apache.camel:camel-jbang-mcp:4.18.0:runner
----

=== HTTP/SSE Transport

To start the server with the HTTP/SSE transport enabled:

[source,bash]
----
jbang -Dquarkus.http.host-enabled=true -Dquarkus.http.port=8080 org.apache.camel:camel-jbang-mcp:4.18.0:runner
----

MCP clients that support HTTP/SSE can then connect to the server at `http://localhost:8080/mcp/sse`.

== Examples

=== Listing Components

Prompt your AI assistant with:

----
List all Camel components in the messaging category
----

The assistant calls `camel_catalog_components` with `label=messaging` and receives structured results with name,
title, description, label, deprecation status, and support level for each matching component.

=== Getting Component Documentation

----
Show me the documentation for the Kafka component, including all endpoint options
----

The assistant calls `camel_catalog_component_doc` with `component=kafka` and receives the full component model
including the URI syntax, Maven coordinates, and every endpoint option with types, defaults, and descriptions.

=== Browsing Kamelets

----
Show me all available source kamelets related to AWS
----

The assistant calls `camel_catalog_kamelets` with `type=source` and `filter=aws` and returns matching Kamelets
with their name, type, support level, and description.

To drill into a specific Kamelet:

----
What options does the aws-s3-source kamelet accept?
----

The assistant calls `camel_catalog_kamelet_doc` with `kamelet=aws-s3-source` and returns the complete property
list including required fields, types, defaults, and Maven dependencies.

=== Validating an Endpoint URI

----
Validate this Kafka endpoint: kafka:myTopic?brkers=localhost:9092&groupId=myGroup
----

The assistant calls `camel_validate_route` and detects the typo (`brkers`), reports the URI as invalid, and
suggests the correct option name (`brokers`).

=== Validating YAML DSL Structure

----
Validate this YAML route definition for me:

- route:
    from:
      uri: timer:yaml
      steps:
        - setCheese:
            simple: Hello Camel
        - log: ${body}
----

The assistant calls `camel_validate_yaml_dsl` which validates the route against the Camel YAML DSL JSON schema
and reports that `setCheese` is not a valid DSL element, returning the instance path and error type so the AI
can suggest the correct processor name (e.g., `setBody`).

=== Understanding a Route

Paste a route and ask:

----
Explain what this route does
----

The assistant calls `camel_route_context` which extracts all components and EIPs used in the route, looks up
their documentation from the catalog, and returns enriched context so the AI can provide an accurate explanation.

=== Security Hardening

----
Analyze this route for security concerns and suggest hardening measures
----

The assistant calls `camel_route_harden_context` which analyzes the route for security-sensitive components,
detects issues (hardcoded credentials, HTTP instead of HTTPS, plain FTP, etc.), assigns risk levels, and
returns structured findings with remediation recommendations.

=== Checking Camel Versions

----
What are the latest LTS versions of Camel for Spring Boot?
----

The assistant calls `camel_version_list` with `runtime=spring-boot` and `lts=true` and returns version
information including release dates, end-of-life dates, and JDK requirements.
