docs/user-manual/modules/ROOT/pages/commercial-camel-offerings.adoc, before:

= Commercial Camel Offerings

Apache Camel is a widely used project. As such, several companies have
built products and services around Camel. This page is dedicated to
providing descriptions of those offerings and links to more information.
Companies are definitely encouraged to update this page directly or
link:/community/mailing-list/[send a mail] to the Camel PMC with a description
of your offerings and we can update the page. The products and services
listed on this page are provided for information use only to our users.
The Camel PMC does not endorse or recommend any of the products or
services on this page. See below for information about what is
appropriate to add to the page.


== http://www.cyberlogic.ch[Cyberlogic Consulting]

http://www.cyberlogic.ch[Cyberlogic Consulting] is a Swiss based
consultancy. We pride ourselves in providing Swiss quality services
including enterprise consulting, coding, systems integration, training
and support for Apache Camel and the related Apache Open Source
Software. We specialize in helping our clients to realize new projects
and support the delivery of the project from end to end.


== https://fluxygen.com[Fluxygen]

https://fluxygen.com[Fluxygen] is a company based in the Netherlands.
It offers a low-code integration platform based on Apache Camel, Apache ActiveMQ and
https://assimbly.org[Assimbly]. The aim is to make integration as easy as possible, 
and enable businesses to automate processes. We also provide cloud services, support and training.


== http://ibm.biz/OSSupport[IBM]

http://ibm.biz/OSSupport[IBM] provides cross-platform support and consulting for
https://www.ibm.com/downloads/cas/KOAB4E9V[Apache Camel and many other open source packages].


== https://linuxpolska.com/[Linux Polska]

https://linuxpolska.com/[Linux Polska] provides consulting,
implementation and maintenance services in the areas of middleware, especially for Apache Camel and related projects based on Apache.
The company also designs and creates its own open source solutions.


== http://www.openlogic.com/[OpenLogic]

http://www.openlogic.com/[OpenLogic] by Perforce has a team of Camel experts ready to help you.
We provide 24/7 support for troubleshooting issues and outages, consulting on architecture and design, and instructor-led, hands-on training.
https://www.openlogic.com/solutions/support-activemq-apache-camel-kafka#apache-camel[Learn more about OpenLogic's Camel support].


== https://www.redhat.com[Red Hat]

https://www.redhat.com[Red Hat] offers a https://developers.redhat.com/products/redhat-build-of-camel/overview[supported build of Camel] as part of 
https://www.redhat.com/en/products/integration[Red Hat Integration] and https://www.redhat.com/en/products/application-foundations[Red Hat Application Foundations].
It contains an enterprise integration platform based on Apache Camel and other
open source integration projects, with developer and production support.
In addition to enterprise support, Red Hat provides
https://www.redhat.com/en/training/skills-path-finder/red-hat-certified-specialist-camel-development[training],
https://www.redhat.com/en/services/consulting[consulting], and
https://developers.redhat.com/products/redhat-build-of-camel/overview[a developer community].

== https://www.randoli.io[Randoli]

We provide consulting and implementation of Microservices as well as modernization support for legacy applications using Spring Boot + Camel or Quarkus + Camel.


== https://riverlog.com/systemintegration/esb-model-and-camel-based-systems-integration[RiverLog]

https://www.riverlog.com[RiverLog Software] engages with systems integrators and implementers to deploy Camel based, ESB model integration within enterprises.
RiverLog's custom scripts and generic modules help in reducing Apache Camel integration efforts across the enterprise. 


== https://www.routeblaze.io[RouteBLAZE]

https://www.routeblaze.io[RouteBLAZE] allows you to design, develop and deploy business processes at Enterprise scale. 
It comes bundled with a suite of tools and services that support every step of the journey, from project inception through to production support.
We also provide bespoke development and consultancy. 


== http://www.savoirtech.com[Savoir Technologies, Inc]

http://www.savoirtech.com[Savoir Technologies, Inc] provides enterprise
consulting, training and support for Camel and a host of other Apache
service containers. Savoir can provide best practice mentoring for
developing with Camel, as well as architectural/design reviews,
troubleshooting and SOA infrastructure implementations.


== https://skintegrationsolutions.com[SK Integration Solutions Private Limited]

https://skintegrationsolutions.com[SK Integration Solutions Private Limited] is a company based in India that offers the best practices for using Apache Camel in all phases of the SDLC.


== http://www.talend.com[Talend, Inc]

http://www.talend.com[Talend, Inc] provides enterprise level services,
training and support for Apache Camel and their
http://www.talend.com/products/esb-standard-edition.php[Talend ESB]
product which is a repackaging of Apache Camel including a full,
pre-configured OSGi runtime container.


== https://talismanplatform.com[Talisman Platform]

The https://talismanplatform.com[Talisman Platform] is a production-ready data integration platform designed for business-critical integrations. 
Designed to facilitate integration driven by the robust capabilities of Apache Camel, 
building on top of https://github.com/apache/camel-karavan[Apache Camel Karavan], the Talisman Platform offers exclusive additional features to enhance your integration experience. 
These include Authentication and Authorization mechanisms, advanced Monitoring and Observability tools, and a comprehensive API Gateway.


== http://touk.pl[TouK]

http://touk.pl[TouK] provides enterprise integration consulting and
system integration services as well as support for Apache Camel and
Apache Servicemix.


== https://www.yupiik.com[Yupiik]

https://www.yupiik.com[Yupiik] contributes and commits to the Apache Camel project. Provides consulting,
training and support for Apache Camel and related projects like Apache Karaf, Apache ActiveMQ, Apache Kafka,
Apache Unomi.


== Policy for additions to this page

Companies are free to add information about their products and services
to this page (please keep entries in alphabetical order). The
information must be factual and informational in nature and not be a
marketing statement. Statements that promote your products and services
over other offerings on the page will not be tolerated and will be
removed. Such marketing statements can be added to your own pages on
your own site, but not here.

When in doubt, email the Camel dev list (see
link:/community/mailing-list/[Mailing Lists]) and ask. We'd be happy to help.

Commit message:

Add meshIQ in the commercial support list (#21123)

docs/user-manual/modules/ROOT/pages/commercial-camel-offerings.adoc, after:

= Commercial Camel Offerings

Apache Camel is a widely used project. As such, several companies have
built products and services around Camel. This page is dedicated to
providing descriptions of those offerings and links to more information.
Companies are definitely encouraged to update this page directly or
link:/community/mailing-list/[send a mail] to the Camel PMC with a description
of your offerings and we can update the page. The products and services
listed on this page are provided for information use only to our users.
The Camel PMC does not endorse or recommend any of the products or
services on this page. See below for information about what is
appropriate to add to the page.


== http://www.cyberlogic.ch[Cyberlogic Consulting]

http://www.cyberlogic.ch[Cyberlogic Consulting] is a Swiss based
consultancy. We pride ourselves in providing Swiss quality services
including enterprise consulting, coding, systems integration, training
and support for Apache Camel and the related Apache Open Source
Software. We specialize in helping our clients to realize new projects
and support the delivery of the project from end to end.


== https://fluxygen.com[Fluxygen]

https://fluxygen.com[Fluxygen] is a company based in the Netherlands.
It offers a low-code integration platform based on Apache Camel, Apache ActiveMQ and
https://assimbly.org[Assimbly]. The aim is to make integration as easy as possible, 
and enable businesses to automate processes. We also provide cloud services, support and training.


== http://ibm.biz/OSSupport[IBM]

http://ibm.biz/OSSupport[IBM] provides cross-platform support and consulting for
https://www.ibm.com/downloads/cas/KOAB4E9V[Apache Camel and many other open source packages].


== https://linuxpolska.com/[Linux Polska]

https://linuxpolska.com/[Linux Polska] provides consulting,
implementation and maintenance services in the areas of middleware, especially for Apache Camel and related projects based on Apache.
The company also designs and creates its own open source solutions.


== http://www.openlogic.com/[OpenLogic]

http://www.openlogic.com/[OpenLogic] by Perforce has a team of Camel experts ready to help you.
We provide 24/7 support for troubleshooting issues and outages, consulting on architecture and design, and instructor-led, hands-on training.
https://www.openlogic.com/solutions/support-activemq-apache-camel-kafka#apache-camel[Learn more about OpenLogic's Camel support].

== https://www.meshiq.com[meshIQ]

meshIQ provides expert support for Apache Camel, ensuring optimal performance and reliability of your routes and Camel runtimes. Their services include monitoring, troubleshooting, and management of Camel routes. meshIQ provides visibility and tracking on the exchanges processed by your Camel routes, integrating with other systems like Apache ActiveMQ or Apache Kafka.

== https://www.redhat.com[Red Hat]

https://www.redhat.com[Red Hat] offers a https://developers.redhat.com/products/redhat-build-of-camel/overview[supported build of Camel] as part of 
https://www.redhat.com/en/products/integration[Red Hat Integration] and https://www.redhat.com/en/products/application-foundations[Red Hat Application Foundations].
It contains an enterprise integration platform based on Apache Camel and other
open source integration projects, with developer and production support.
In addition to enterprise support, Red Hat provides
https://www.redhat.com/en/training/skills-path-finder/red-hat-certified-specialist-camel-development[training],
https://www.redhat.com/en/services/consulting[consulting], and
https://developers.redhat.com/products/redhat-build-of-camel/overview[a developer community].

== https://www.randoli.io[Randoli]

We provide consulting and implementation of Microservices as well as modernization support for legacy applications using Spring Boot + Camel or Quarkus + Camel.


== https://riverlog.com/systemintegration/esb-model-and-camel-based-systems-integration[RiverLog]

https://www.riverlog.com[RiverLog Software] engages with systems integrators and implementers to deploy Camel based, ESB model integration within enterprises.
RiverLog's custom scripts and generic modules help in reducing Apache Camel integration efforts across the enterprise. 


== https://www.routeblaze.io[RouteBLAZE]

https://www.routeblaze.io[RouteBLAZE] allows you to design, develop and deploy business processes at Enterprise scale. 
It comes bundled with a suite of tools and services that support every step of the journey, from project inception through to production support.
We also provide bespoke development and consultancy. 


== http://www.savoirtech.com[Savoir Technologies, Inc]

http://www.savoirtech.com[Savoir Technologies, Inc] provides enterprise
consulting, training and support for Camel and a host of other Apache
service containers. Savoir can provide best practice mentoring for
developing with Camel, as well as architectural/design reviews,
troubleshooting and SOA infrastructure implementations.


== https://skintegrationsolutions.com[SK Integration Solutions Private Limited]

https://skintegrationsolutions.com[SK Integration Solutions Private Limited] is a company based in India that offers the best practices for using Apache Camel in all phases of the SDLC.


== http://www.talend.com[Talend, Inc]

http://www.talend.com[Talend, Inc] provides enterprise level services,
training and support for Apache Camel and their
http://www.talend.com/products/esb-standard-edition.php[Talend ESB]
product which is a repackaging of Apache Camel including a full,
pre-configured OSGi runtime container.


== https://talismanplatform.com[Talisman Platform]

The https://talismanplatform.com[Talisman Platform] is a production-ready data integration platform designed for business-critical integrations. 
Designed to facilitate integration driven by the robust capabilities of Apache Camel, 
building on top of https://github.com/apache/camel-karavan[Apache Camel Karavan], the Talisman Platform offers exclusive additional features to enhance your integration experience. 
These include Authentication and Authorization mechanisms, advanced Monitoring and Observability tools, and a comprehensive API Gateway.


== http://touk.pl[TouK]

http://touk.pl[TouK] provides enterprise integration consulting and
system integration services as well as support for Apache Camel and
Apache Servicemix.


== https://www.yupiik.com[Yupiik]

https://www.yupiik.com[Yupiik] contributes and commits to the Apache Camel project. Provides consulting,
training and support for Apache Camel and related projects like Apache Karaf, Apache ActiveMQ, Apache Kafka,
Apache Unomi.


== Policy for additions to this page

Companies are free to add information about their products and services
to this page (please keep entries in alphabetical order). The
information must be factual and informational in nature and not be a
marketing statement. Statements that promote your products and services
over other offerings on the page will not be tolerated and will be
removed. Such marketing statements can be added to your own pages on
your own site, but not here.

When in doubt, email the Camel dev list (see
link:/community/mailing-list/[Mailing Lists]) and ask. We'd be happy to help.
