[[CommercialCamelOfferings-CommercialCamelOfferings]]
=== Commercial Camel Offerings

Apache Camel is a widely used project. As such, several companies have
built products and services around Camel. This page is dedicated to
providing descriptions of those offerings and links to more information.
Companies are definitely encouraged to update this page directly or
link:mailing-lists.adoc[send a mail] to the Camel PMC with a description
of your offerings and we can update the page. The products and services
listed on this page are provided for information use only to our users.
The Camel PMC does not endorse or recommend any of the products or
services on this page. See below for information about what is
appropriate to add to the page.

[[CommercialCamelOfferings-Code-House]]
==== http://code-house.org[Code-House]

http://code-house.org[Code-House] is european service provider with own
training programs covering Apache middleware projects (Camel,
ServiceMix, ActiveMQ) on development and system operations level. We
also offer dedicated management tool.

[[CommercialCamelOfferings-CyberlogicConsulting]]
==== http://www.cyberlogic.ch[Cyberlogic Consulting]

http://www.cyberlogic.ch[Cyberlogic Consulting] is a Swiss based
consultancy. We pride ourselves in providing Swiss quality services
including enterprise consulting, coding, systems integration, training
and support for Apache Camel and the related Apache Open Source
Software. We specialize in helping our clients to realize new projects
and support the delivery of the project from end to end.

[[CommercialCamelOfferings-Evosent]]
==== http://evosent.com/?utm_source=apache&utm_medium=web&utm_campaign=commercial_support[Evosent]

http://evosent.com/?utm_source=apache&utm_medium=web&utm_campaign=commercial_support[Evosent] is
a boutique consultancy based in Europe. It specialises in open source
integration middleware, messaging and big data: Apache Camel,
ServiceMix, Karaf, ActiveMQ, Elasticsearch (+ Kibana + Logstash), Docker
and Kubernetes.  Evosent is managed by a committer and PMC member at the
Apache Camel and Apache Ignite projects. Amongst it services are: ninja
consulting and support; workshops, mentoring and training; proof of
concept development; and sophisticated engineering services.

[[CommercialCamelOfferings-GOAPPO]]
==== https://www.goappo.com[GOAPPO]

https://www.goappo.com[GOAPPO] embeds Apache Camel at design, testing
and runtime. You start by composing ETLs using the application builder.
You test ETLs instantly on your machine. You bundle ETLs with your
application.

[[CommercialCamelOfferings-MediaDriver]]
==== http://mediadriver.com[Media Driver]

Media Driver provides consulting services and management tools for
Apache Camel, Red Hat JBoss Fuse and the Apache Integration stack
(ActiveMQ, CXF, Karaf, ServiceMix, etc) for both the commercial and
public sector. We bring a full suite of project delivery services
including business and technical analysis, proof of concepts,
architectural guidance, best practice integration, and project
management. Media Driver offers training classes for developers and
administrators, as well as middleware management software.

[[CommercialCamelOfferings-Middleware360]]
==== http://www.middleware360.com/[Middleware360]

http://www.middleware360.com/[Middleware360] Enterprise Integration
consulting services.

[[CommercialCamelOfferings-OpenLogic]]
==== http://www.openlogic.com/[OpenLogic]

http://www.openlogic.com/[OpenLogic] provide support.

[[CommercialCamelOfferings-RedHat]]
==== https://www.redhat.com/en/technologies/jboss-middleware/fuse[Red Hat]

https://www.redhat.com/en/technologies/jboss-middleware/fuse[Red Hat] offers
http://www.redhat.com/en/technologies/jboss-middleware/fuse[Fuse],
an enterprise integration platform based on Apache Camel and other
open source integration projects, with developer and production support.
In addition to enterprise support, Red Hat provides
https://www.redhat.com/en/services/training/courses-by-curriculum#Red-Hat-JBoss-Fuse-BRMS-and-more[training],
https://www.redhat.com/en/services/consulting[consulting], and
https://developers.redhat.com/products/fuse/overview/[a developer community].

[[CommercialCamelOfferings-SavoirTechnologiesInc]]
==== http://www.savoirtech.com[Savoir Technologies, Inc]

http://www.savoirtech.com[Savoir Technologies, Inc] provides enterprise
consulting, training and support for Camel and a host of other Apache
service containers. Savoir can provide best practice mentoring for
developing with Camel, as well as architectural/design reviews,
troubleshooting and SOA infrastructure implementations.

[[CommercialCamelOfferings-TalendInc]]
==== http://www.talend.com[Talend, Inc]

http://www.talend.com[Talend, Inc] provides enterprise level services,
training and support for Apache Camel and their
http://www.talend.com/products/esb-standard-edition.php[Talend ESB]
product which is a repackaging of Apache Camel including a full,
pre-configured OSGi runtime container.

[[CommercialCamelOfferings-TouK]]
==== http://touk.pl[TouK]

http://touk.pl[TouK] provides enterprise integration consulting and
system integration services as well as support for Apache Camel and
Apache Servicemix. Their developers were involved in camel-activiti
development.

[[CommercialCamelOfferings-Policyforadditionstothispage]]
==== Policy for additions to this page

Companies are free to add information about their products and services
to this page (please keep entries in alphabetical order). The
information must be factual and informational in nature and not be a
marketing statement. Statements that promote your products and services
over other offerings on the page will not be tolerated and will be
removed. Such marketing statements can be added to your own pages on
your own site, but not here.

When in doubt, email the Camel dev list (see
link:mailing-lists.adoc[Mailing Lists]) and ask. We'd be happy to help.
