= Endpoint Annotations

You can annotate xref:endpoint.adoc[Endpoint] and
Consumer classes so that their configuration documentation can be
automatically generated by the camel-package-maven-plugin (rather like
maven plugin goals get their parameters documented automatically).

The documentation is then included into the jar as
org/apache/camel/component/scheme/scheme.adoc where scheme is the
component name.

== Supported annotations

[width="100%",cols="50%,50%",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Annotation |Description
|@UriEndpoint |Specifies that an endpoint is annotated with @UriParam
and/or @UriParams annotations. Also specifies the default scheme to use
in the generated documentation and the associated Consumer class for
this endpoint

|@UriParam |Used to annotate a parameter value; usually specified via
?foo=bar syntax in the URI strings in Camel. Used currently only on
field declarations but in the future could be used on setter methods
too. If no name is specified then the name of the field/setter property
is used.

|@UriParams |Specifies that a field is a nested object of one or more
configuration parameters; then the class of this field should be
annotated with one or more @UriParam or @UriParams annotations
|=======================================================================

For example here is the
https://github.com/apache/camel/blob/trunk/camel-core/src/main/java/org/apache/camel/component/timer/TimerEndpoint.java#L40[TimerEndpoint],
notice the use of these annotations and in its base classes.

Not only are the annotations useful for automatically generating the
documentation; we can use them to refine the validation of the code
during configuration and they can be useful for tool providers so they
can more easily introspect the configuration options. See the
xref:componentconfiguration.adoc[ComponentConfiguration] documentation
on the tooling aspect.

Using the UriEndpointComponent base class

If you use the @UriEndpoint annotation on your Endpoint along with one
or more @UriParam / @UriParams annotations on your class (or any base
classes of your endpoint) its recommended that your Component class
inherit from the UriEndpointComponent base class as that means your
Component will automatically generate better metadata for the
xref:componentconfiguration.adoc[ComponentConfiguration] API.

This will allow your component to work better inside tools which make
use of the xref:componentconfiguration.adoc[ComponentConfiguration] API
to generate nice forms and so forth.
