components/camel-leveldb/src/main/docs/leveldb.adoc, before:

= LevelDB Component
:doctitle: LevelDB
:shortname: leveldb
:artifactid: camel-leveldb
:description: Using LevelDB as persistent EIP store
:since: 2.10
:supportlevel: Stable
:tabs-sync-option:
//Manually maintained attributes
:camel-spring-boot-name: leveldb

*Since Camel {since}*

https://github.com/google/leveldb[Leveldb] is a very lightweight and
embeddable key value database.
It allows, together with Camel, providing
persistent support for various Camel features such as
Aggregator.

Current features it provides:

* `LevelDBAggregationRepository`

[[LevelDB-UsingLevelDBAggregationRepository]]
== Using LevelDBAggregationRepository

`LevelDBAggregationRepository` is an `AggregationRepository` which on
the fly persists the aggregated messages. This ensures that you will not
lose messages, as the default aggregator will use an in-memory only
`AggregationRepository`.

It has the following options:

[width="100%",cols="10%,10%,80%",options="header",]
|=======================================================================

|Option |Type |Description

|`repositoryName` |String |A mandatory repository name. Allows you to use a shared `LevelDBFile`
for multiple repositories.

|`persistentFileName` |String |Filename for the persistent storage. If no file exists on startup, a new
file is created.

|`levelDBFile` |LevelDBFile |Use an existing configured
`org.apache.camel.component.leveldb.LevelDBFile` instance.

|`sync` |boolean |Whether the LevelDBFile should sync on writing or
not. Default is false. By sync on writing ensures that it's always waiting
for all writes to be spooled to disk and thus will not lose updates.
See http://leveldb.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/doc/index.html[LevelDB docs]
for more details about async vs. sync writes.

|`returnOldExchange` |boolean |Whether the get operation should return the old existing Exchange if any
existed. By default, this option is `false` to optimize as we do not need
the old exchange when aggregating.

|`useRecovery` |boolean |Whether recovery is enabled. This option is by default `true`.
When enabled, the Camel Aggregator automatically recovers failed aggregated exchange and have them resubmitted.

|`recoveryInterval` |long |If recovery is enabled, then a background task is run every x'th time to
scan for failed exchanges to recover and resubmit. By default, this
interval is 5000 milliseconds.

|`maximumRedeliveries` |int |Allows you to limit the maximum number of redelivery attempts for a
recovered exchange. If enabled, then the Exchange will be moved to the
dead letter channel if all redelivery attempts failed. By default, this
option is disabled. If this option is used then the `deadLetterUri`
option must also be provided.

|`deadLetterUri` |String |An endpoint uri for a Dead Letter Channel
where exhausted recovered Exchanges will be moved. If this option is
used then the `maximumRedeliveries` option must also be provided.
|=======================================================================

The `repositoryName` option must be provided. Then either the
`persistentFileName` or the `levelDBFile` must be provided.

[[LevelDB-Whatispreservedwhenpersisting]]
=== What is preserved when persisting

`LevelDBAggregationRepository` will only preserve any `Serializable`
compatible message body data types. Message headers must be primitive /
string / numbers / etc. If a data type is not such a type its dropped
and a `WARN` is logged. And it only persists the `Message` body and the
`Message` headers. The `Exchange` properties are *not* persisted.

[[LevelDB-Recovery]]
=== Recovery

The `LevelDBAggregationRepository` will by default recover any failed
Exchange. It does this by having a background task
that scans for failed Exchanges in the persistent
store. You can use the `checkInterval` option to set how often this task
runs. The recovery works as transactional which ensures that Camel will
try to recover and redeliver the failed Exchange.
Any Exchange found to be recovered will be
restored from the persistent store and resubmitted and send out again.

The following headers are set when an Exchange is
being recovered/redelivered:

[width="100%",cols="10%,10%,80%",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Header |Type |Description

|`Exchange.REDELIVERED` |Boolean |It is set to true to indicate the Exchange is being
redelivered.

|`Exchange.REDELIVERY_COUNTER` |Integer |The redelivery attempt, starting from 1.
|=======================================================================

Only when an Exchange has been successfully
processed it will be marked as complete which happens when the `confirm`
method is invoked on the `AggregationRepository`. This means if the same
Exchange fails again, it will be kept retried until it succeeds.

You can use option `maximumRedeliveries` to limit the maximum number of
redelivery attempts for a given recovered Exchange.
You must also set the `deadLetterUri` option so Camel knows where to
send the Exchange when the `maximumRedeliveries` was
hit.

You can see some examples in the unit tests of camel-leveldb, for
example,
https://github.com/apache/camel/blob/main/components/camel-leveldb/src/test/java/org/apache/camel/component/leveldb/LevelDBAggregateRecoverTest.java[this
test].

[[LevelDB-Serialization]]
=== Serialization mechanism

Component serializes by using Java serialization mechanism by default.

You can use serialization via Jackson (using json).
Jackson's serialization brings better performance, but also several limitations.

Example of jackson serialization:
[source,java]
----------------------------------------
LevelDBAggregationRepository repo = ...; //initialization of repository
repo.setSerializer(new JacksonLevelDBSerializer());
----------------------------------------

Limitation of jackson serializer is caused by binary data:

* If payload is a raw data (byte[]), it is saved into DB without using Jackson
* If payload contains objects with binary fields. Those fields won't be serialized/deserialized correctly. Customized serializer
can be used to solve this problem. Please use custom serializer with Jackson by providing own Module:

[source,java]
----------------------------------------
SimpleModule simpleModule = new SimpleModule();
simpleModule.addSerializer(ObjectWithBinaryField.class, new ObjectWithBinaryFieldSerializer()); //custom serializer
simpleModule.addDeserializer(ObjectWithBinaryField.class, new ObjectWithBinaryFieldDeserializer()); //custom deserializer

repo.setSerializer(new JacksonLevelDBSerializer(simpleModule));
----------------------------------------

[[LevelDB-UsingLevelDBAggregationRepositoryinJavaDSL]]
== Using LevelDBAggregationRepository in Java DSL

In this example we want to persist aggregated messages in the
`target/data/leveldb.dat` file.

[[LevelDB-UsingLevelDBAggregationRepositoryinSpringXML]]
== Using LevelDBAggregationRepository in Spring XML

The same example but using Spring XML instead:

[[LevelDB-Dependencies]]
== Dependencies

To use LevelDB in your Camel routes, you need to add a dependency on *camel-leveldb*.

If you use Maven, you could add the following to your pom.xml,
substituting the version number for the latest & greatest release.

[source,xml]
----------------------------------------
<dependency>
  <groupId>org.apache.camel</groupId>
  <artifactId>camel-leveldb</artifactId>
  <version>x.y.z</version>
</dependency>
----------------------------------------

include::spring-boot:partial$starter.adoc[]

Commit message:

CAMEL-22966 - Camel-LevelDB: Add ObjectInputFilter String pattern parameter in LevelDBAggregationRepository to be used in unmarshall operations (#21288)
Signed-off-by: Andrea Cosentino <ancosen@gmail.com>

components/camel-leveldb/src/main/docs/leveldb.adoc, after:

= LevelDB Component
:doctitle: LevelDB
:shortname: leveldb
:artifactid: camel-leveldb
:description: Using LevelDB as persistent EIP store
:since: 2.10
:supportlevel: Stable
:tabs-sync-option:
//Manually maintained attributes
:camel-spring-boot-name: leveldb

*Since Camel {since}*

https://github.com/google/leveldb[Leveldb] is a very lightweight and
embeddable key value database.
It allows, together with Camel, providing
persistent support for various Camel features such as
Aggregator.

Current features it provides:

* `LevelDBAggregationRepository`

[[LevelDB-UsingLevelDBAggregationRepository]]
== Using LevelDBAggregationRepository

`LevelDBAggregationRepository` is an `AggregationRepository` which on
the fly persists the aggregated messages. This ensures that you will not
lose messages, as the default aggregator will use an in-memory only
`AggregationRepository`.

It has the following options:

[width="100%",cols="10%,10%,80%",options="header",]
|=======================================================================

|Option |Type |Description

|`repositoryName` |String |A mandatory repository name. Allows you to use a shared `LevelDBFile`
for multiple repositories.

|`persistentFileName` |String |Filename for the persistent storage. If no file exists on startup, a new
file is created.

|`levelDBFile` |LevelDBFile |Use an existing configured
`org.apache.camel.component.leveldb.LevelDBFile` instance.

|`sync` |boolean |Whether the LevelDBFile should sync on writing or
not. Default is false. By sync on writing ensures that it's always waiting
for all writes to be spooled to disk and thus will not lose updates.
See http://leveldb.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/doc/index.html[LevelDB docs]
for more details about async vs. sync writes.

|`returnOldExchange` |boolean |Whether the get operation should return the old existing Exchange if any
existed. By default, this option is `false` to optimize as we do not need
the old exchange when aggregating.

|`useRecovery` |boolean |Whether recovery is enabled. This option is by default `true`.
When enabled, the Camel Aggregator automatically recovers failed aggregated exchange and have them resubmitted.

|`recoveryInterval` |long |If recovery is enabled, then a background task is run every x'th time to
scan for failed exchanges to recover and resubmit. By default, this
interval is 5000 milliseconds.

|`maximumRedeliveries` |int |Allows you to limit the maximum number of redelivery attempts for a
recovered exchange. If enabled, then the Exchange will be moved to the
dead letter channel if all redelivery attempts failed. By default, this
option is disabled. If this option is used then the `deadLetterUri`
option must also be provided.

|`deadLetterUri` |String |An endpoint uri for a Dead Letter Channel
where exhausted recovered Exchanges will be moved. If this option is
used then the `maximumRedeliveries` option must also be provided.

|`deserializationFilter` |String |A deserialization filter used when
deserializing exchange data from the LevelDB store. The filter uses the
standard Java `ObjectInputFilter` pattern syntax. By default, the filter
is set to `java.**;org.apache.camel.**;!*` which allows Java platform
classes and Apache Camel classes. If your application stores custom objects,
you can adjust this filter to include additional packages
(e.g., `java.**;org.apache.camel.**;com.mycompany.**;!*`).
|=======================================================================

The `repositoryName` option must be provided. Then either the
`persistentFileName` or the `levelDBFile` must be provided.

[[LevelDB-Whatispreservedwhenpersisting]]
=== What is preserved when persisting

`LevelDBAggregationRepository` will only preserve any `Serializable`
compatible message body data types. Message headers must be primitive /
string / numbers / etc. If a data type is not such a type its dropped
and a `WARN` is logged. And it only persists the `Message` body and the
`Message` headers. The `Exchange` properties are *not* persisted.

[[LevelDB-Recovery]]
=== Recovery

The `LevelDBAggregationRepository` will by default recover any failed
Exchange. It does this by having a background task
that scans for failed Exchanges in the persistent
store. You can use the `checkInterval` option to set how often this task
runs. The recovery works as transactional which ensures that Camel will
try to recover and redeliver the failed Exchange.
Any Exchange found to be recovered will be
restored from the persistent store and resubmitted and send out again.

The following headers are set when an Exchange is
being recovered/redelivered:

[width="100%",cols="10%,10%,80%",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Header |Type |Description

|`Exchange.REDELIVERED` |Boolean |It is set to true to indicate the Exchange is being
redelivered.

|`Exchange.REDELIVERY_COUNTER` |Integer |The redelivery attempt, starting from 1.
|=======================================================================

Only when an Exchange has been successfully
processed it will be marked as complete which happens when the `confirm`
method is invoked on the `AggregationRepository`. This means if the same
Exchange fails again, it will be kept retried until it succeeds.

You can use option `maximumRedeliveries` to limit the maximum number of
redelivery attempts for a given recovered Exchange.
You must also set the `deadLetterUri` option so Camel knows where to
send the Exchange when the `maximumRedeliveries` was
hit.

You can see some examples in the unit tests of camel-leveldb, for
example,
https://github.com/apache/camel/blob/main/components/camel-leveldb/src/test/java/org/apache/camel/component/leveldb/LevelDBAggregateRecoverTest.java[this
test].

[[LevelDB-Serialization]]
=== Serialization mechanism

Component serializes by using Java serialization mechanism by default.

You can use serialization via Jackson (using json).
Jackson's serialization brings better performance, but also several limitations.

Example of jackson serialization:
[source,java]
----------------------------------------
LevelDBAggregationRepository repo = ...; //initialization of repository
repo.setSerializer(new JacksonLevelDBSerializer());
----------------------------------------

Limitation of jackson serializer is caused by binary data:

* If payload is a raw data (byte[]), it is saved into DB without using Jackson
* If payload contains objects with binary fields. Those fields won't be serialized/deserialized correctly. Customized serializer
can be used to solve this problem. Please use custom serializer with Jackson by providing own Module:

[source,java]
----------------------------------------
SimpleModule simpleModule = new SimpleModule();
simpleModule.addSerializer(ObjectWithBinaryField.class, new ObjectWithBinaryFieldSerializer()); //custom serializer
simpleModule.addDeserializer(ObjectWithBinaryField.class, new ObjectWithBinaryFieldDeserializer()); //custom deserializer

repo.setSerializer(new JacksonLevelDBSerializer(simpleModule));
----------------------------------------

[[LevelDB-UsingLevelDBAggregationRepositoryinJavaDSL]]
== Using LevelDBAggregationRepository in Java DSL

In this example we want to persist aggregated messages in the
`target/data/leveldb.dat` file.

[[LevelDB-UsingLevelDBAggregationRepositoryinSpringXML]]
== Using LevelDBAggregationRepository in Spring XML

The same example but using Spring XML instead:

[[LevelDB-Dependencies]]
== Dependencies

To use LevelDB in your Camel routes, you need to add a dependency on *camel-leveldb*.

If you use Maven, you could add the following to your pom.xml,
substituting the version number for the latest & greatest release.

[source,xml]
----------------------------------------
<dependency>
  <groupId>org.apache.camel</groupId>
  <artifactId>camel-leveldb</artifactId>
  <version>x.y.z</version>
</dependency>
----------------------------------------

include::spring-boot:partial$starter.adoc[]
