components/camel-hashicorp-vault/src/main/docs/hashicorp-vault-component.adoc, before:

= Hashicorp Vault Component
:doctitle: Hashicorp Vault
:shortname: hashicorp-vault
:artifactid: camel-hashicorp-vault
:description: Manage secrets in Hashicorp Vault Service
:since: 3.18
:supportlevel: Stable
:tabs-sync-option:
:component-header: Only producer is supported
//Manually maintained attributes
:camel-spring-boot-name: hashicorp-vault

*Since Camel {since}*

*{component-header}*

The hashicorp-vault component that integrates https://www.vaultproject.io/[Hashicorp Vault].


== URI Format

[source,xml]
------------------------------------------------------------
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.apache.camel</groupId>
    <artifactId>camel-hashicorp-vault</artifactId>
    <version>x.x.x</version>
    <!-- use the same version as your Camel core version -->
</dependency>
------------------------------------------------------------


// component-configure options: START

// component-configure options: END

// component options: START
include::partial$component-configure-options.adoc[]
include::partial$component-endpoint-options.adoc[]
// component options: END

// endpoint options: START

// endpoint options: END

// component headers: START
include::partial$component-endpoint-headers.adoc[]
// component headers: END

== Examples

=== Using Hashicorp Vault Property Function

To use this function, you'll need to provide credentials for Hashicorp vault as environment variables:

[source,bash]
----
export $CAMEL_VAULT_HASHICORP_TOKEN=token
export $CAMEL_VAULT_HASHICORP_HOST=host
export $CAMEL_VAULT_HASHICORP_PORT=port
export $CAMEL_VAULT_HASHICORP_SCHEME=http/https
----

You can also configure the credentials in the `application.properties` file such as:

[source,properties]
----
camel.vault.hashicorp.token = token
camel.vault.hashicorp.host = host
camel.vault.hashicorp.port = port
camel.vault.hashicorp.scheme = scheme
----

NOTE: if you're running the application on a Kubernetes based cloud platform, you can initialize the environment variables from a Secret or Configmap to enhance security. You can also enhance security by xref:manual::using-propertyplaceholder.adoc#_resolving_property_placeholders_on_cloud[setting a Secret property placeholder] which will be initialized at application runtime only.

NOTE: `camel.vault.hashicorp` configuration only applies to the Hashicorp Vault properties function (E.g when resolving properties).
When using the `operation` option to create, get, list secrets etc., you should provide the `host`, `port`, `scheme` (if required) & `token` options.

At this point, you'll be able to reference a property in the following way:

[source,xml]
----
<camelContext>
    <route>
        <from uri="direct:start"/>
        <to uri="{{hashicorp:secret:route}}"/>
    </route>
</camelContext>
----

Where route will be the name of the secret stored in the Hashicorp Vault instance, in the 'secret' engine.

You could specify a default value in case the secret is not present on Hashicorp Vault instance:

[source,xml]
----
<camelContext>
    <route>
        <from uri="direct:start"/>
        <to uri="{{hashicorp:secret:route:default}}"/>
    </route>
</camelContext>
----

In this case, if the secret doesn't exist in the 'secret' engine, the property will fall back to "default" as value.

Also, you are able to get a particular field of the secret, if you have, for example, a secret named database of this form:

[source,bash]
----
{
  "username": "admin",
  "password": "password123",
  "engine": "postgres",
  "host": "127.0.0.1",
  "port": "3128",
  "dbname": "db"
}
----

You're able to do get single secret value in your route, in the 'secret' engine, like for example:

[source,xml]
----
<camelContext>
    <route>
        <from uri="direct:start"/>
        <log message="Username is {{hashicorp:secret:database#username}}"/>
    </route>
</camelContext>
----

Or re-use the property as part of an endpoint.

You could specify a default value in case the particular field of secret is not present on Hashicorp Vault instance, in the 'secret' engine:

[source,xml]
----
<camelContext>
    <route>
        <from uri="direct:start"/>
        <log message="Username is {{hashicorp:secret:database#username:admin}}"/>
    </route>
</camelContext>
----

In this case, if the secret doesn't exist or the secret exists (in the 'secret' engine) but the username field is not part of the secret, the property will fall back to "admin" as value.

There is also the syntax to get a particular version of the secret for both the approach, with field/default value specified or only with secret:

[source,xml]
----
<camelContext>
    <route>
        <from uri="direct:start"/>
        <to uri="{{hashicorp:secret:route@2}}"/>
    </route>
</camelContext>
----

This approach will return the RAW route secret with version '2', in the 'secret' engine.

[source,xml]
----
<camelContext>
    <route>
        <from uri="direct:start"/>
        <to uri="{{hashicorp:route:default@2}}"/>
    </route>
</camelContext>
----

This approach will return the route secret value with version '2' or default value in case the secret doesn't exist or the version doesn't exist (in the 'secret' engine).

[source,xml]
----
<camelContext>
    <route>
        <from uri="direct:start"/>
        <log message="Username is {{hashicorp:secret:database#username:admin@2}}"/>
    </route>
</camelContext>
----

This approach will return the username field of the database secret with version '2' or admin in case the secret doesn't exist or the version doesn't exist (in the 'secret' engine).

The only requirement is adding the camel-hashicorp-vault jar to your Camel application.

include::spring-boot:partial$starter.adoc[]

=== Using Hashicorp Vault Property Function in Spring Boot for Early resolving properties

Hashicorp Vault Spring Boot component starter offers the ability to early resolve properties, so the end user could resolve properties directly in the application.properties before both Spring Boot runtime and Camel context will start.

This could be accomplished in the following way. You should specified this property in your application.properties file:

[source,bash]
----
camel.component.hashicorp-vault.early-resolve-properties=true
----

This will enable the feature so you'll be able to resolved properties, in your application.properties file, like:

[source,bash]
----
foo = hashicorp:secret:database/password#string
----

Commit message:

CAMEL-21640 - Camel-Hashicorp-Vault: Support Hashicorp Cloud deployment in properties function - Docs (#16873)
* CAMEL-21640 - Camel-Hashicorp-Vault: Support Hashicorp Cloud deployment in properties function - Docs

Signed-off-by: Andrea Cosentino <ancosen@gmail.com>

* CAMEL-21640 - Camel-Hashicorp-Vault: Support Hashicorp Cloud deployment in properties function - Docs

Signed-off-by: Andrea Cosentino <ancosen@gmail.com>

---------

Signed-off-by: Andrea Cosentino <ancosen@gmail.com>

components/camel-hashicorp-vault/src/main/docs/hashicorp-vault-component.adoc, after:

= Hashicorp Vault Component
:doctitle: Hashicorp Vault
:shortname: hashicorp-vault
:artifactid: camel-hashicorp-vault
:description: Manage secrets in Hashicorp Vault Service
:since: 3.18
:supportlevel: Stable
:tabs-sync-option:
:component-header: Only producer is supported
//Manually maintained attributes
:camel-spring-boot-name: hashicorp-vault

*Since Camel {since}*

*{component-header}*

The hashicorp-vault component that integrates https://www.vaultproject.io/[Hashicorp Vault].


== URI Format

[source,xml]
------------------------------------------------------------
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.apache.camel</groupId>
    <artifactId>camel-hashicorp-vault</artifactId>
    <version>x.x.x</version>
    <!-- use the same version as your Camel core version -->
</dependency>
------------------------------------------------------------


// component-configure options: START

// component-configure options: END

// component options: START
include::partial$component-configure-options.adoc[]
include::partial$component-endpoint-options.adoc[]
// component options: END

// endpoint options: START

// endpoint options: END

// component headers: START
include::partial$component-endpoint-headers.adoc[]
// component headers: END

== Examples

=== Using Hashicorp Vault Property Function

To use this function, you'll need to provide credentials for Hashicorp vault as environment variables:

[source,bash]
----
export CAMEL_VAULT_HASHICORP_TOKEN=token
export CAMEL_VAULT_HASHICORP_HOST=host
export CAMEL_VAULT_HASHICORP_PORT=port
export CAMEL_VAULT_HASHICORP_SCHEME=http/https
----

You can also configure the credentials in the `application.properties` file such as:

[source,properties]
----
camel.vault.hashicorp.token = token
camel.vault.hashicorp.host = host
camel.vault.hashicorp.port = port
camel.vault.hashicorp.scheme = scheme
----

In case the running Hashicorp Vault instance you're pointing is running on Hashicorp Cloud, the configuration will require two additional parameters:

[source,bash]
----
export CAMEL_VAULT_HASHICORP_TOKEN=token
export CAMEL_VAULT_HASHICORP_HOST=host
export CAMEL_VAULT_HASHICORP_PORT=port
export CAMEL_VAULT_HASHICORP_SCHEME=http/https
export CAMEL_HASHICORP_VAULT_CLOUD=true
export CAMEL_HASHICORP_VAULT_NAMESPACE=namespace
----

You can also set the same in the `application.properties` file such as:

[source,properties]
----
camel.vault.hashicorp.token = token
camel.vault.hashicorp.host = host
camel.vault.hashicorp.port = port
camel.vault.hashicorp.scheme = scheme
camel.vault.hashicorp.cloud = true
camel.vault.hashicorp.namespace = namespace
----

This will make the Properties function works even in the Hashicorp Cloud deployment option.

NOTE: if you're running the application on a Kubernetes based cloud platform, you can initialize the environment variables from a Secret or Configmap to enhance security. You can also enhance security by xref:manual::using-propertyplaceholder.adoc#_resolving_property_placeholders_on_cloud[setting a Secret property placeholder] which will be initialized at application runtime only.

NOTE: `camel.vault.hashicorp` configuration only applies to the Hashicorp Vault properties function (E.g when resolving properties).
When using the `operation` option to create, get, list secrets etc., you should provide the `host`, `port`, `scheme` (if required) & `token` options.

At this point, you'll be able to reference a property in the following way:

[source,xml]
----
<camelContext>
    <route>
        <from uri="direct:start"/>
        <to uri="{{hashicorp:secret:route}}"/>
    </route>
</camelContext>
----

Where route will be the name of the secret stored in the Hashicorp Vault instance, in the 'secret' engine.

You could specify a default value in case the secret is not present on Hashicorp Vault instance:

[source,xml]
----
<camelContext>
    <route>
        <from uri="direct:start"/>
        <to uri="{{hashicorp:secret:route:default}}"/>
    </route>
</camelContext>
----

In this case, if the secret doesn't exist in the 'secret' engine, the property will fall back to "default" as value.

Also, you are able to get a particular field of the secret, if you have, for example, a secret named database of this form:

[source,bash]
----
{
  "username": "admin",
  "password": "password123",
  "engine": "postgres",
  "host": "127.0.0.1",
  "port": "3128",
  "dbname": "db"
}
----

You're able to do get single secret value in your route, in the 'secret' engine, like for example:

[source,xml]
----
<camelContext>
    <route>
        <from uri="direct:start"/>
        <log message="Username is {{hashicorp:secret:database#username}}"/>
    </route>
</camelContext>
----

Or re-use the property as part of an endpoint.

You could specify a default value in case the particular field of secret is not present on Hashicorp Vault instance, in the 'secret' engine:

[source,xml]
----
<camelContext>
    <route>
        <from uri="direct:start"/>
        <log message="Username is {{hashicorp:secret:database#username:admin}}"/>
    </route>
</camelContext>
----

In this case, if the secret doesn't exist or the secret exists (in the 'secret' engine) but the username field is not part of the secret, the property will fall back to "admin" as value.

There is also the syntax to get a particular version of the secret for both the approach, with field/default value specified or only with secret:

[source,xml]
----
<camelContext>
    <route>
        <from uri="direct:start"/>
        <to uri="{{hashicorp:secret:route@2}}"/>
    </route>
</camelContext>
----

This approach will return the RAW route secret with version '2', in the 'secret' engine.

[source,xml]
----
<camelContext>
    <route>
        <from uri="direct:start"/>
        <to uri="{{hashicorp:route:default@2}}"/>
    </route>
</camelContext>
----

This approach will return the route secret value with version '2' or default value in case the secret doesn't exist or the version doesn't exist (in the 'secret' engine).

[source,xml]
----
<camelContext>
    <route>
        <from uri="direct:start"/>
        <log message="Username is {{hashicorp:secret:database#username:admin@2}}"/>
    </route>
</camelContext>
----

This approach will return the username field of the database secret with version '2' or admin in case the secret doesn't exist or the version doesn't exist (in the 'secret' engine).

The only requirement is adding the camel-hashicorp-vault jar to your Camel application.

include::spring-boot:partial$starter.adoc[]

=== Using Hashicorp Vault Property Function in Spring Boot for Early resolving properties

Hashicorp Vault Spring Boot component starter offers the ability to early resolve properties, so the end user could resolve properties directly in the application.properties before both Spring Boot runtime and Camel context will start.

This could be accomplished in the following way. You should specified this property in your application.properties file:

[source,bash]
----
camel.component.hashicorp-vault.early-resolve-properties=true
----

This will enable the feature so you'll be able to resolved properties, in your application.properties file, like:

[source,bash]
----
foo = hashicorp:secret:database/password#string
----
