components/camel-aws/camel-aws-xray/src/main/docs/aws-xray.adoc, before:

= AWS XRay Component
:doctitle: AWS XRay
:shortname: aws-xray
:artifactid: camel-aws-xray
:description: Enable Distributed tracing using AWS XRay
:since: 2.21
:supportlevel: Stable
:tabs-sync-option:
//Manually maintained attributes
:camel-spring-boot-name: aws-xray

*Since Camel {since}*

The camel-aws-xray component is used for tracing and timing incoming and outgoing Camel messages using https://aws.amazon.com/xray/[AWS XRay].

Events (subsegments) are captured for incoming and outgoing messages being sent to/from Camel.


== Configuration

The configuration properties for the AWS XRay tracer are:

[width="100%",cols="10%,10%,80%",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Option |Default |Description

|addExcludePatterns | &nbsp; | Sets exclude pattern(s) that will disable tracing for Camel
messages that matches the pattern. The content is a Set<String> where the key is a pattern matching routeId's. The pattern
uses the rules from Intercept.
|setTracingStrategy | NoopTracingStrategy | Allows a custom Camel `InterceptStrategy` to be provided to track invoked processor definitions like `BeanDefinition` or `ProcessDefinition`. `TraceAnnotatedTracingStrategy` will track any classes invoked via `.bean(...)` or `.process(...)` that contain a `@XRayTrace` annotation at class level.

|=======================================================================

There is currently only one way an AWS XRay tracer can be configured to provide distributed tracing for a Camel application:

=== Explicit

Include the `camel-aws-xray` component in your POM, along with any specific dependencies associated with the AWS XRay Tracer.

To explicitly configure AWS XRay support, instantiate the `XRayTracer` and initialize the camel
context. You can optionally specify a `Tracer`, or alternatively it can be implicitly discovered using the
`Registry` or `ServiceLoader`.

[source,java]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
XRayTracer xrayTracer = new XRayTracer();
// By default, it uses a NoopTracingStrategy, but you can override it with a specific InterceptStrategy implementation.
xrayTracer.setTracingStrategy(...);
// And then initialize the context
xrayTracer.init(camelContext);
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

To use XRayTracer in XML, all you need to do is to define the
AWS XRay tracer bean. Camel will automatically discover and use it.

[source,xml]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  <bean id="tracingStrategy" class="..."/>
  <bean id="aws-xray-tracer" class="org.apache.camel.component.aws.xray.XRayTracer">
    <property name="tracer" ref="tracingStrategy"/>
  </bean>
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In case of the default `NoopTracingStrategy` only the creation and deletion of exchanges is tracked but not the invocation of certain beans or EIP patterns.

=== Tracking of comprehensive route execution

To track the execution of an exchange among multiple routes, on exchange creation a unique trace ID is generated and stored in the headers if no corresponding value was yet available. This trace ID is copied over to new exchanges to keep a consistent view of the processed exchange.

As AWS XRay traces work on a thread-local basis, the current sub/segment should be copied over to the new thread and set as explained in https://docs.aws.amazon.com/xray/latest/devguide/xray-sdk-java-multithreading.html[the AWS XRay documentation]. The Camel AWS XRay component therefore provides an additional header field that the component will use to set the passed AWS XRay `Entity` to the new thread and thus keep the tracked data to the route rather than exposing a new segment which seems uncorrelated with any of the executed routes.

The component will use the following constants found in the headers of the exchange:

[width="100%",cols="30%,70%",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Header |Description

| Camel-AWS-XRay-Trace-ID | Contains a reference to the AWS XRay `TraceID` object to provide a comprehensive view of the invoked routes
| Camel-AWS-XRay-Trace-Entity | Contains a reference to the actual AWS XRay `Segment` or `Subsegment` which is copied over to the new thread. This header should be set in case a new thread is spawned and the performed tasks should be exposed as part of the executed route instead of creating a new unrelated segment.

|=======================================================================

Note that the AWS XRay `Entity` (i.e., `Segment` and `Subsegment`) are not serializable and therefore should not get passed to other JVM processes.

== Example

You can find an example demonstrating the way to configure AWS XRay tracing within the tests accompanying this project.

== Dependency

To include AWS XRay support into Camel, the archive containing the Camel related AWS XRay related classes needs to be added to the project. In addition to that, AWS XRay libraries also need to be available.

To include both AWS XRay and Camel dependencies, use the following Maven imports:

[source,xml]
----
  <dependencyManagement>
    <dependencies>
      <dependency>
        <groupId>com.amazonaws</groupId>
        <artifactId>aws-xray-recorder-sdk-bom</artifactId>
        <version>2.4.0</version>
        <type>pom</type>
        <scope>import</scope>
      </dependency>
    </dependencies>
  </dependencyManagement>

  <dependencies>
      <dependency>
        <groupId>org.apache.camel</groupId>
        <artifactId>camel-aws-xray</artifactId>
      </dependency>

      <dependency>
        <groupId>com.amazonaws</groupId>
        <artifactId>aws-xray-recorder-sdk-core</artifactId>
      </dependency>
      <dependency>
        <groupId>com.amazonaws</groupId>
        <artifactId>aws-xray-recorder-sdk-aws-sdk</artifactId>
      </dependency>
  </dependencies>
----

include::spring-boot:partial$starter.adoc[]

Commit message:

CAMEL-22631: camel-aws-xray: Deprecated (#19793)

components/camel-aws/camel-aws-xray/src/main/docs/aws-xray.adoc, after:

= AWS XRay Component (deprecated)
:doctitle: AWS XRay
:shortname: aws-xray
:artifactid: camel-aws-xray
:description: Enable Distributed tracing using AWS XRay
:since: 2.21
:supportlevel: Stable-deprecated
:deprecated: *deprecated*
:tabs-sync-option:
//Manually maintained attributes
:camel-spring-boot-name: aws-xray

*Since Camel {since}*

The camel-aws-xray component is used for tracing and timing incoming and outgoing Camel messages using https://aws.amazon.com/xray/[AWS XRay].

Events (subsegments) are captured for incoming and outgoing messages being sent to/from Camel.

NOTE: https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/mt/announcing-aws-x-ray-sdks-daemon-end-of-support-and-opentelemetry-migration/[Amazon has announced]
that AWS XRay is deprecated and will be EOL in 2027

== Configuration

The configuration properties for the AWS XRay tracer are:

[width="100%",cols="10%,10%,80%",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Option |Default |Description

|addExcludePatterns | &nbsp; | Sets exclude pattern(s) that will disable tracing for Camel
messages that matches the pattern. The content is a Set<String> where the key is a pattern matching routeId's. The pattern
uses the rules from Intercept.
|setTracingStrategy | NoopTracingStrategy | Allows a custom Camel `InterceptStrategy` to be provided to track invoked processor definitions like `BeanDefinition` or `ProcessDefinition`. `TraceAnnotatedTracingStrategy` will track any classes invoked via `.bean(...)` or `.process(...)` that contain a `@XRayTrace` annotation at class level.

|=======================================================================

There is currently only one way an AWS XRay tracer can be configured to provide distributed tracing for a Camel application:

=== Explicit

Include the `camel-aws-xray` component in your POM, along with any specific dependencies associated with the AWS XRay Tracer.

To explicitly configure AWS XRay support, instantiate the `XRayTracer` and initialize the camel
context. You can optionally specify a `Tracer`, or alternatively it can be implicitly discovered using the
`Registry` or `ServiceLoader`.

[source,java]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
XRayTracer xrayTracer = new XRayTracer();
// By default, it uses a NoopTracingStrategy, but you can override it with a specific InterceptStrategy implementation.
xrayTracer.setTracingStrategy(...);
// And then initialize the context
xrayTracer.init(camelContext);
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

To use XRayTracer in XML, all you need to do is to define the
AWS XRay tracer bean. Camel will automatically discover and use it.

[source,xml]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  <bean id="tracingStrategy" class="..."/>
  <bean id="aws-xray-tracer" class="org.apache.camel.component.aws.xray.XRayTracer">
    <property name="tracer" ref="tracingStrategy"/>
  </bean>
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In case of the default `NoopTracingStrategy` only the creation and deletion of exchanges is tracked but not the invocation of certain beans or EIP patterns.

=== Tracking of comprehensive route execution

To track the execution of an exchange among multiple routes, on exchange creation a unique trace ID is generated and stored in the headers if no corresponding value was yet available. This trace ID is copied over to new exchanges to keep a consistent view of the processed exchange.

As AWS XRay traces work on a thread-local basis, the current sub/segment should be copied over to the new thread and set as explained in https://docs.aws.amazon.com/xray/latest/devguide/xray-sdk-java-multithreading.html[the AWS XRay documentation]. The Camel AWS XRay component therefore provides an additional header field that the component will use to set the passed AWS XRay `Entity` to the new thread and thus keep the tracked data to the route rather than exposing a new segment which seems uncorrelated with any of the executed routes.

The component will use the following constants found in the headers of the exchange:

[width="100%",cols="30%,70%",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Header |Description

| Camel-AWS-XRay-Trace-ID | Contains a reference to the AWS XRay `TraceID` object to provide a comprehensive view of the invoked routes
| Camel-AWS-XRay-Trace-Entity | Contains a reference to the actual AWS XRay `Segment` or `Subsegment` which is copied over to the new thread. This header should be set in case a new thread is spawned and the performed tasks should be exposed as part of the executed route instead of creating a new unrelated segment.

|=======================================================================

Note that the AWS XRay `Entity` (i.e., `Segment` and `Subsegment`) are not serializable and therefore should not get passed to other JVM processes.

== Example

You can find an example demonstrating the way to configure AWS XRay tracing within the tests accompanying this project.

== Dependency

To include AWS XRay support into Camel, the archive containing the Camel related AWS XRay related classes needs to be added to the project. In addition to that, AWS XRay libraries also need to be available.

To include both AWS XRay and Camel dependencies, use the following Maven imports:

[source,xml]
----
  <dependencyManagement>
    <dependencies>
      <dependency>
        <groupId>com.amazonaws</groupId>
        <artifactId>aws-xray-recorder-sdk-bom</artifactId>
        <version>2.4.0</version>
        <type>pom</type>
        <scope>import</scope>
      </dependency>
    </dependencies>
  </dependencyManagement>

  <dependencies>
      <dependency>
        <groupId>org.apache.camel</groupId>
        <artifactId>camel-aws-xray</artifactId>
      </dependency>

      <dependency>
        <groupId>com.amazonaws</groupId>
        <artifactId>aws-xray-recorder-sdk-core</artifactId>
      </dependency>
      <dependency>
        <groupId>com.amazonaws</groupId>
        <artifactId>aws-xray-recorder-sdk-aws-sdk</artifactId>
      </dependency>
  </dependencies>
----

include::spring-boot:partial$starter.adoc[]
