[[JMS-JMSComponent]]
JMS Component
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

[TIP]
====
*Using ActiveMQ*

If you are using http://activemq.apache.org/[Apache ActiveMQ], you
should prefer the link:activemq.html[ActiveMQ] component as it has been
optimized for link:activemq.html[ActiveMQ]. All of the options and
samples on this page are also valid for the link:activemq.html[ActiveMQ]
component.
====

[NOTE]
====
*Transacted and caching*

See section _Transactions and Cache Levels_ below if you are using
transactions with link:jms.html[JMS] as it can impact performance.
====

[NOTE]
====
*Request/Reply over JMS*

Make sure to read the section _Request-reply over JMS_ further below on
this page for important notes about request/reply, as Camel offers a
number of options to configure for performance, and clustered
environments.
====

This component allows messages to be sent to (or consumed from) a
http://java.sun.com/products/jms/[JMS] Queue or Topic. It uses Spring's
JMS support for declarative transactions, including Spring's
`JmsTemplate` for sending and a `MessageListenerContainer` for
consuming.

Maven users will need to add the following dependency to their `pom.xml`
for this component:

[source,xml]
------------------------------------------------------------
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.apache.camel</groupId>
    <artifactId>camel-jms</artifactId>
    <version>x.x.x</version>
    <!-- use the same version as your Camel core version -->
</dependency>
------------------------------------------------------------

[[JMS-URIformat]]
URI format
^^^^^^^^^^

--------------------------------------------
jms:[queue:|topic:]destinationName[?options]
--------------------------------------------

Where `destinationName` is a JMS queue or topic name. By default, the
`destinationName` is interpreted as a queue name. For example, to
connect to the queue, `FOO.BAR` use:

-----------
jms:FOO.BAR
-----------

You can include the optional `queue:` prefix, if you prefer:

-----------------
jms:queue:FOO.BAR
-----------------

To connect to a topic, you _must_ include the `topic:` prefix. For
example, to +
 connect to the topic, `Stocks.Prices`, use:

-----------------------
jms:topic:Stocks.Prices
-----------------------

You append query options to the URI using the following format,
`?option=value&option=value&...`

[[JMS-Notes]]
Notes
^^^^^

[[JMS-UsingActiveMQ]]
Using ActiveMQ
++++++++++++++

The JMS component reuses Spring 2's `JmsTemplate` for sending messages.
This is not ideal for use in a non-J2EE container and typically requires
some caching in the JMS provider to avoid
http://activemq.apache.org/jmstemplate-gotchas.html[poor performance].

If you intend to use http://activemq.apache.org/[Apache ActiveMQ] as
your Message Broker - which is a good choice as ActiveMQ rocks
image:https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/s/en_GB/5982/f2b47fb3d636c8bc9fd0b11c0ec6d0ae18646be7.1/_/images/icons/emoticons/smile.png[(smile)]
, then we recommend that you either:

* Use the link:activemq.html[ActiveMQ] component, which is already
optimized to use ActiveMQ efficiently
* Use the `PoolingConnectionFactory` in ActiveMQ.

[[JMS-TransactionsandCacheLevels]]
Transactions and Cache Levels
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

If you are consuming messages and using transactions
(`transacted=true`) then the default settings for cache level can impact
performance. +
 If you are using XA transactions then you cannot cache as it can cause
the XA transaction to not work properly.

If you are *not* using XA, then you should consider caching as it speeds
up performance, such as setting `cacheLevelName=CACHE_CONSUMER`.

Through Camel 2.7.x, the default setting for `cacheLevelName` is
`CACHE_CONSUMER`. You will need to explicitly set
`cacheLevelName=CACHE_NONE`. +
 In Camel 2.8 onwards, the default setting for `cacheLevelName` is
`CACHE_AUTO`. This default auto detects the mode and sets the cache
level accordingly to:

* CACHE_CONSUMER = if transacted=false
* CACHE_NONE = if transacted=true

So you can say the default setting is conservative. Consider using
`cacheLevelName=CACHE_CONSUMER` if you are using non-XA transactions.

[[JMS-DurableSubscriptions]]
Durable Subscriptions
+++++++++++++++++++++

If you wish to use durable topic subscriptions, you need to specify both
*clientId* and **durableSubscriptionName**. The value of the `clientId`
must be unique and can only be used by a single JMS connection instance
in your entire network. You may prefer to use
http://activemq.apache.org/virtual-destinations.html[Virtual Topics]
instead to avoid this limitation. More background on durable messaging
http://activemq.apache.org/how-do-durable-queues-and-topics-work.html[here].

[[JMS-MessageHeaderMapping]]
Message Header Mapping
++++++++++++++++++++++

When using message headers, the JMS specification states that header
names must be valid Java identifiers. So try to name your headers to be
valid Java identifiers. One benefit of doing this is that you can then
use your headers inside a JMS Selector (whose SQL92 syntax mandates Java
identifier syntax for headers).

A simple strategy for mapping header names is used by default. The
strategy is to replace any dots and hyphens in the header name as shown
below and to reverse the replacement when the header name is restored
from a JMS message sent over the wire. What does this mean? No more
losing method names to invoke on a bean component, no more losing the
filename header for the File Component, and so on.

The current header name strategy for accepting header names in Camel is
as follows:

* Dots are replaced by `_DOT_` and the replacement is reversed when
Camel consume the message
* Hyphen is replaced by `_HYPHEN_` and the replacement is reversed when
Camel consumes the message

[[JMS-Options]]
Options
^^^^^^^

You can configure many different properties on the JMS endpoint which
map to properties on the
http://camel.apache.org/maven/current/camel-jms/apidocs/org/apache/camel/component/jms/JmsConfiguration.html[JMSConfiguration
POJO].

[WARNING]
====
*Mapping to Spring JMS*

Many of these properties map to properties on Spring JMS, which Camel
uses for sending and receiving messages. So you can get more information
about these properties by consulting the relevant Spring documentation.
====

The options are divided into two tables, the first one with the most
common options used. The latter contains the rest.

[[JMS-Mostcommonlyusedoptions]]
Most commonly used options
++++++++++++++++++++++++++

[width="100%",cols="10%,10%,80%",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Option |Default Value |Description
|`clientId` |`null` |Sets the JMS client ID to use. Note that this
value, if specified, must be unique and can only be used by a single JMS
connection instance. It is typically only required for durable topic
subscriptions. You may prefer to use
http://activemq.apache.org/virtual-destinations.html[Virtual Topics]
instead.

|`concurrentConsumers` |`1` |Specifies the default number of concurrent
consumers. From *Camel 2.10.3* onwards this option can also be used when
doing request/reply over JMS. From *Camel 2.16* onwards there is a new
replyToConcurrentConsumers. See also the `maxMessagesPerTask` option to
control dynamic scaling up/down of threads.

|`replyToConcurrentConsumers` |1 |*Camel 2.16:* Specifies the default
number of concurrent consumers when doing request/reply over JMS.

|`disableReplyTo` |`false` |If `true`, a producer will behave like a
InOnly exchange with the exception that `JMSReplyTo` header is sent out
and not be suppressed like in the case of `InOnly`. Like `InOnly` the
producer will not wait for a reply. A consumer with this flag will
behave like `InOnly`. This feature can be used to bridge `InOut`
requests to another queue so that a route on the other queue will send
it´s response directly back to the original `JMSReplyTo`.

|`durableSubscriptionName` |`null` |The durable subscriber name for
specifying durable topic subscriptions. The `clientId` option *must* be
configured as well.

|`maxConcurrentConsumers` |`1` |Specifies the maximum number of
concurrent consumers. From *Camel 2.10.3* onwards this option can also
be used when doing request/reply over JMS. From **Camel 2.16** onwards
there is a new replyToMaxConcurrentConsumers. See also the
`maxMessagesPerTask` option to control dynamic scaling up/down of
threads. The `maxMessagesPerTask` option MUST be set to an integer
greater than 0 for threads to scale down. Otherwise, the number of
threads will stay at maxConcurrentConsumers until shutdown.

|`replyToMaxConcurrentConsumers` |1 |*Camel 2.16:* Specifies the maximum
number of concurrent consumers when doing request/reply over JMS. See
also the `maxMessagesPerTask` option to control dynamic scaling up/down
of threads.

|`maxMessagesPerTask` |`-1` |The number of messages per task. -1 is
unlimited. If you use a range for concurrent consumers (eg min < max),
then this option can be used to set a value to eg `100` to control how
fast the consumers will shrink when less work is required.

|`preserveMessageQos` |`false` |Set to `true`, if you want to send
message using the QoS settings specified on the message, instead of the
QoS settings on the JMS endpoint. The following three headers are
considered `JMSPriority`, `JMSDeliveryMode`, and `JMSExpiration`. You
can provide all or only some of them. If not provided, Camel will fall
back to use the values from the endpoint instead. So, when using this
option, the headers override the values from the endpoint. The
`explicitQosEnabled` option, by contrast, will only use options set on
the endpoint, and not values from the message header.

|`replyTo` |`null` |Provides an explicit ReplyTo destination, which
overrides any incoming value of `Message.getJMSReplyTo()`. If you do
link:request-reply.html[Request Reply] over JMS then *make sure* to read
the section _Request-reply over JMS_ further below for more details, and
the `replyToType` option as well.

|`replyToOverride` |`null` |*Camel 2.15:* Provides an explicit ReplyTo
destination in the JMS message, which overrides the setting of replyTo.
It is useful if you want to forward the message to a remote Queue and
receive the reply message from the ReplyTo destination.

|`replyToType` |`null` |*Camel 2.9:* Allows for explicitly specifying
which kind of strategy to use for replyTo queues when doing
request/reply over JMS. Possible values are: `Temporary`, `Shared`, or
`Exclusive`. By default Camel will use temporary queues. However if
`replyTo` has been configured, then `Shared` is used by default. This
option allows you to use exclusive queues instead of shared ones. See
further below for more details, and especially the notes about the
implications if running in a clustered environment, and the fact that
`Shared` reply queues has lower performance than its alternatives
`Temporary` and `Exclusive`.

|`requestTimeout` |`20000` |*Producer only:* The timeout for waiting for
a reply when using the InOut link:exchange-pattern.html[Exchange
Pattern] (in milliseconds). The default is 20 seconds. From *Camel
2.13/2.12.3* onwards you can include the header
`"CamelJmsRequestTimeout"` to override this endpoint configured timeout
value, and thus have per message individual timeout values. See below in
section _About time to live_ for more details. See also the
_requestTimeoutCheckerInterval_ option.

|`selector` |`null` |Sets the JMS Selector, which is an SQL 92 predicate
that is used to filter messages within the broker. You may have to
encode special characters such as = as %3D **Before Camel 2.3.0**, we
don't support this option in CamelConsumerTemplate

|`timeToLive` |`null` |When sending messages, specifies the time-to-live
of the message (in milliseconds). See below in section _About time to
live_ for more details.

|`transacted` |`false` |Specifies whether to use transacted mode for
sending/receiving messages using the InOnly
link:exchange-pattern.html[Exchange Pattern].

|`testConnectionOnStartup` |`false` |*Camel 2.1:* Specifies whether to
test the connection on startup. This ensures that when Camel starts that
all the JMS consumers have a valid connection to the JMS broker. If a
connection cannot be granted then Camel throws an exception on startup.
This ensures that Camel is not started with failed connections. From
*Camel 2.8* onwards also the JMS producers is tested as well.
|=======================================================================

[[JMS-Alltheotheroptions]]
All the other options
+++++++++++++++++++++

 

[width="100%",cols="10%,10%,80%",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Option |Default Value |Description
|`acceptMessagesWhileStopping` |`false` |Specifies whether the consumer
accept messages while it is stopping. You may consider enabling this
option, if you start and stop link:jms.html[JMS] routes at runtime,
while there are still messages enqued on the queue. If this option is
`false`, and you stop the link:jms.html[JMS] route, then messages may be
rejected, and the JMS broker would have to attempt redeliveries, which
yet again may be rejected, and eventually the message may be moved at a
dead letter queue on the JMS broker. To avoid this its recommended to
enable this option.

|`acknowledgementModeName` |`AUTO_ACKNOWLEDGE` |The JMS acknowledgement
name, which is one of: `SESSION_TRANSACTED`, `CLIENT_ACKNOWLEDGE`,
`AUTO_ACKNOWLEDGE`, `DUPS_OK_ACKNOWLEDGE`

|`acknowledgementMode` |`-1` |The JMS acknowledgement mode defined as an
Integer. Allows you to set vendor-specific extensions to the
acknowledgment mode. For the regular modes, it is preferable to use the
`acknowledgementModeName` instead.

|`allowNullBody` |`true` |*Camel 2.9.3/2.10.1:* Whether to allow sending
messages with no body. If this option is `false` and the message body is
null, then an `JMSException` is thrown.

|`alwaysCopyMessage` |`false` |If `true`, Camel will always make a JMS
message copy of the message when it is passed to the producer for
sending. Copying the message is needed in some situations, such as when
a `replyToDestinationSelectorName` is set (incidentally, Camel will set
the `alwaysCopyMessage` option to `true`, if a
`replyToDestinationSelectorName` is set)

|`asyncConsumer` |`false` |*Camel 2.9:* Whether the `JmsConsumer`
processes the link:exchange.html[Exchange]
link:asynchronous-routing-engine.html[asynchronously]. If enabled then
the `JmsConsumer` may pickup the next message from the JMS queue, while
the previous message is being processed asynchronously (by the
link:asynchronous-routing-engine.html[Asynchronous Routing Engine]).
This means that messages may be processed not 100% strictly in order. If
disabled (as default) then the link:exchange.html[Exchange] is fully
processed before the `JmsConsumer` will pickup the next message from the
JMS queue. Note if `transacted` has been enabled, then
`asyncConsumer=true` does not run asynchronously, as transactions must
be executed synchronously (Camel 3.0 may support async transactions).

|`asyncStartListener` |`false` |*Camel 2.10:* Whether to startup the
`JmsConsumer` message listener asynchronously, when starting a route.
For example if a `JmsConsumer` cannot get a connection to a remote JMS
broker, then it may block while retrying and/or failover. This will
cause Camel to block while starting routes. By setting this option to
`true`, you will let routes startup, while the `JmsConsumer` connects to
the JMS broker using a dedicated thread in asynchronous mode. If this
option is used, then beware that if the connection could not be
established, then an exception is logged at `WARN` level, and the
consumer will not be able to receive messages; You can then restart the
route to retry.

|`asyncStopListener` |`false` |*Camel 2.10:* Whether to stop the
`JmsConsumer` message listener asynchronously, when stopping a route.

|`autoStartup` |`true` |Specifies whether the consumer container should
auto-startup.

|`cacheLevelName` |CACHE_AUTO (Camel >= 2.8.0) +
 CACHE_CONSUMER (Camel <= 2.7.1) |Sets the cache level by name for the
underlying JMS resources. Possible values are: `CACHE_AUTO`,
`CACHE_CONNECTION`, `CACHE_CONSUMER`, `CACHE_NONE`, and `CACHE_SESSION`.
The default setting for *Camel 2.8* and newer is `CACHE_AUTO`. For
*Camel 2.7.1* and older the default is `CACHE_CONSUMER`. See the
http://static.springframework.org/spring/docs/2.5.x/api/org/springframework/jms/listener/DefaultMessageListenerContainer.html[Spring
documentation] and link:jms.html[Transactions Cache Levels] for more
information.

|`cacheLevel` |  |Sets the cache level by ID for the underlying JMS
resources. See `cacheLevelName` option for more details.

|`consumerType` |`Default` |The consumer type to use, which can be one
of: `Simple`, `Default`, or `Custom`. The consumer type determines which
Spring JMS listener to use. `Default` will use
`org.springframework.jms.listener.DefaultMessageListenerContainer`,
`Simple` will use
`org.springframework.jms.listener.SimpleMessageListenerContainer`. When
`Custom` is specified, the `MessageListenerContainerFactory` defined by
the `messageListenerContainerFactoryRef` option will determine what
`org.springframework.jms.listener.AbstractMessageListenerContainer` to
use (**new option in Camel 2.10.2 onwards**). This option was temporary
removed in Camel 2.7 and 2.8. But has been added back from Camel 2.9
onwards.

|`connectionFactory` |`null` |The default JMS connection factory to use
for the `listenerConnectionFactory` and `templateConnectionFactory`, if
neither is specified.

|`defaultTaskExecutorType` |(see description) |*Camel 2.10.4:* Specifies
what default TaskExecutor type to use in the
DefaultMessageListenerContainer, for both consumer endpoints and the
ReplyTo consumer of producer endpoints. Possible values: `SimpleAsync`
(uses Spring's
http://static.springsource.org/spring/docs/current/javadoc-api/org/springframework/core/task/SimpleAsyncTaskExecutor.html[SimpleAsyncTaskExecutor])
or `ThreadPool` (uses Spring's
http://static.springsource.org/spring/docs/current/javadoc-api/org/springframework/scheduling/concurrent/ThreadPoolTaskExecutor.html[ThreadPoolTaskExecutor]
with optimal values - cached threadpool-like). If not set, it defaults
to the previous behaviour, which uses a cached thread pool for consumer
endpoints and SimpleAsync for reply consumers. The use of `ThreadPool`
is recommended to reduce "thread trash" in elastic configurations with
dynamically increasing and decreasing concurrent consumers.

|`deliveryMode` |null |*Camel 2.12.2/2.13:* Specifies the delivery mode
to be used. Possibles values are those defined by
`javax.jms.DeliveryMode`.

|`deliveryPersistent` |`true` |Specifies whether persistent delivery is
used by default.

|`destination` |`null` |Specifies the JMS Destination object to use on
this endpoint.

|`destinationName` |`null` |Specifies the JMS destination name to use on
this endpoint.

|`destinationResolver` |`null` |A pluggable
`org.springframework.jms.support.destination.DestinationResolver` that
allows you to use your own resolver (for example, to lookup the real
destination in a JNDI registry).

|`disableTimeToLive` |`false` |*Camel 2.8:* Use this option to force
disabling time to live. For example when you do request/reply over JMS,
then Camel will by default use the `requestTimeout` value as time to
live on the message being sent. The problem is that the sender and
receiver systems have to have their clocks synchronized, so they are in
sync. This is not always so easy to archive. So you can use
`disableTimeToLive=true` to *not* set a time to live value on the sent
message. Then the message will not expire on the receiver system. See
below in section _About time to live_ for more details.

|`eagerLoadingOfProperties` |`false` |Enables eager loading of JMS
properties as soon as a message is received, which is generally
inefficient, because the JMS properties might not be required. But this
feature can sometimes catch early any issues with the underlying JMS
provider and the use of JMS properties. This feature can also be used
for testing purposes, to ensure JMS properties can be understood and
handled correctly.

|`exceptionListener` |`null` |Specifies the JMS Exception Listener that
is to be notified of any underlying JMS exceptions.

|`errorHandler` |`null` |*Camel 2.8.2, 2.9:* Specifies a
`org.springframework.util.ErrorHandler` to be invoked in case of any
uncaught exceptions thrown while processing a `Message`. By default
these exceptions will be logged at the WARN level, if no `errorHandler`
has been configured. From *Camel 2.9.1:* onwards you can configure
logging level and whether stack traces should be logged using the below
two options. This makes it much easier to configure, than having to code
a custom `errorHandler`.

|`errorHandlerLoggingLevel` |`WARN` |*Camel 2.9.1:* Allows to configure
the default `errorHandler` logging level for logging uncaught
exceptions.

|`errorHandlerLogStackTrace` |`true` |*Camel 2.9.1:* Allows to control
whether stacktraces should be logged or not, by the default
`errorHandler`.

|`explicitQosEnabled` |`false` |Set if the `deliveryMode`, `priority` or
`timeToLive` qualities of service should be used when sending messages.
This option is based on Spring's `JmsTemplate`. The `deliveryMode`,
`priority` and `timeToLive` options are applied to the current endpoint.
This contrasts with the `preserveMessageQos` option, which operates at
message granularity, reading QoS properties exclusively from the Camel
In message headers.

|`exposeListenerSession` |`true` |Specifies whether the listener session
should be exposed when consuming messages.

|`forceSendOriginalMessage` |`false` |*Camel 2.7:* When using
`mapJmsMessage=false` Camel will create a new JMS message to send to a
new JMS destination if you touch the headers (get or set) during the
route. Set this option to `true` to force Camel to send the original JMS
message that was received.

|`idleTaskExecutionLimit` |`1` |Specifies the limit for idle executions
of a receive task, not having received any message within its execution.
If this limit is reached, the task will shut down and leave receiving to
other executing tasks (in the case of dynamic scheduling; see the
`maxConcurrentConsumers` setting). There is additional doc available
from
http://static.springsource.org/spring/docs/3.0.5.RELEASE/api/org/springframework/jms/listener/DefaultMessageListenerContainer.html#setIdleTaskExecutionLimit(int)[Spring].

|`idleConsumerLimit` |`1` |*Camel 2.8.2, 2.9:* Specify the limit for the
number of consumers that are allowed to be idle at any given time.

|`includeSentJMSMessageID` |`false` |*Camel 2.10.3:* Only applicable
when sending to JMS destination using InOnly (eg fire and forget).
Enabling this option will enrich the Camel link:exchange.html[Exchange]
with the actual JMSMessageID that was used by the JMS client when the
message was sent to the JMS destination.

|`includeAllJMSXProperties` |`false` |*Camel 2.11.2/2.12:* Whether to
include all JMSXxxx properties when mapping from JMS to Camel Message.
Setting this to `true` will include properties such as `JMSXAppID`, and
`JMSXUserID` etc. *Note:* If you are using a custom
`headerFilterStrategy` then this option does not apply.

|`jmsMessageType` |`null` |Allows you to force the use of a specific
`javax.jms.Message` implementation for sending JMS messages. Possible
values are: `Bytes`, `Map`, `Object`, `Stream`, `Text`. By default,
Camel would determine which JMS message type to use from the In body
type. This option allows you to specify it.

|`jmsKeyFormatStrategy` |`default` |Pluggable strategy for encoding and
decoding JMS keys so they can be compliant with the JMS specification.
Camel provides two implementations out of the box: `default` and
`passthrough`. The `default` strategy will safely marshal dots and
hyphens (`.` and `-`). The `passthrough` strategy leaves the key as is.
Can be used for JMS brokers which do not care whether JMS header keys
contain illegal characters. You can provide your own implementation of
the `org.apache.camel.component.jms.JmsKeyFormatStrategy` and refer to
it using the `#` notation.

|`jmsOperations` |`null` |Allows you to use your own implementation of
the `org.springframework.jms.core.JmsOperations` interface. Camel uses
`JmsTemplate` as default. Can be used for testing purpose, but not used
much as stated in the spring API docs.

|`lazyCreateTransactionManager` |`true` |If `true`, Camel will create a
`JmsTransactionManager`, if there is no `transactionManager` injected
when option `transacted=true`.

|`listenerConnectionFactory` |`null` |The JMS connection factory used
for consuming messages.

|`mapJmsMessage` |`true` |Specifies whether Camel should auto map the
received JMS message to an appropiate payload type, such as
`javax.jms.TextMessage` to a `String` etc. See section about how mapping
works below for more details.

|`maximumBrowseSize` |`-1` |Limits the number of messages fetched at
most, when browsing endpoints using link:browse.html[Browse] or JMX API.

|`messageConverter` |`null` |To use a custom Spring
`org.springframework.jms.support.converter.MessageConverter` so you can
be 100% in control how to map to/from a `javax.jms.Message`.

|`messageIdEnabled` |`true` |When sending, specifies whether message IDs
should be added.

|`messageListenerContainerFactoryRef` |`null` |*Camel 2.10.2:* Registry
ID of the `MessageListenerContainerFactory` used to determine what
`org.springframework.jms.listener.AbstractMessageListenerContainer` to
use to consume messages. Setting this will automatically set
`consumerType` to `Custom`.

|`messageTimestampEnabled` |`true` |Specifies whether timestamps should
be enabled by default on sending messages.

|`password` |`null` |The password for the connector factory.

|`priority` |`4` |Values greater than 1 specify the message priority
when sending (where 0 is the lowest priority and 9 is the highest). The
`explicitQosEnabled` option *must* also be enabled in order for this
option to have any effect.

|`pubSubNoLocal` |`false` |Specifies whether to inhibit the delivery of
messages published by its own connection.

|`receiveTimeout` |1000 |The timeout for receiving messages (in
milliseconds).

|`recoveryInterval` |`5000` |Specifies the interval between recovery
attempts, i.e. when a connection is being refreshed, in milliseconds.
The default is 5000 ms, that is, 5 seconds.

|`replyToSameDestinationAllowed` |`false` |*Camel 2.16:* **Consumer
only:**Whether a JMS consumer is allowed to send a reply message to the
same destination that the consumer is using to consume from. This
prevents an endless loop by consuming and sending back the same message
to itself.

|`replyToCacheLevelName` |CACHE_CONSUMER |*Camel 2.9.1:* Sets the cache
level by name for the reply consumer when doing request/reply over JMS.
This option only applies when using fixed reply queues (not temporary).
Camel will by default use: `CACHE_CONSUMER` for exclusive or shared w/
`replyToSelectorName`. And `CACHE_SESSION` for shared without
`replyToSelectorName`. Some JMS brokers such as IBM WebSphere may
require to set the `replyToCacheLevelName=CACHE_NONE` to work. *Note:*
If using temporary queues then `CACHE_NONE` is not allowed, and you must
use a higher value such as `CACHE_CONSUMER` or `CACHE_SESSION`.

|`replyToDestinationSelectorName` |`null` |Sets the JMS Selector using
the fixed name to be used so you can filter out your own replies from
the others when using a shared queue (that is, if you are not using a
temporary reply queue).

|`replyToDeliveryPersistent` |`true` |Specifies whether to use
persistent delivery by default for replies.

|`requestTimeoutCheckerInterval` |`1000` |*Camel 2.9.2:* Configures how
often Camel should check for timed out link:exchange.html[Exchange]s
when doing request/reply over JMS.By default Camel checks once per
second. But if you must react faster when a timeout occurs, then you can
lower this interval, to check more frequently. The timeout is determined
by the option __requestTimeout__.

|`subscriptionDurable` |`false` |*@deprecated:* Enabled by default, if
you specify a `durableSubscriptionName` and a `clientId`.

|`taskExecutor` |`null` |Allows you to specify a custom task executor
for consuming messages.

|`taskExecutorSpring2` |`null` |*Camel 2.6:* To use when using Spring
2.x with Camel. Allows you to specify a custom task executor for
consuming messages.

|`templateConnectionFactory` |`null` |The JMS connection factory used
for sending messages.

|`transactedInOut` |`false` |*@deprecated:* Specifies whether to use
transacted mode for sending messages using the InOut
link:exchange-pattern.html[Exchange Pattern]. Applies only to producer
endpoints. See section link:jms.html[Enabling Transacted Consumption]
for more details.

|`transactionManager` |`null` |The Spring transaction manager to use.

|`transactionName` |`"JmsConsumer [destinationName]"` |The name of the
transaction to use.

|`transactionTimeout` |`null` |The timeout value of the transaction (in
seconds), if using transacted mode.

|`transferException` |`false` |If enabled and you are using
link:request-reply.html[Request Reply] messaging (InOut) and an
link:exchange.html[Exchange] failed on the consumer side, then the
caused `Exception` will be send back in response as a
`javax.jms.ObjectMessage`. If the client is Camel, the returned
`Exception` is rethrown. This allows you to use Camel link:jms.html[JMS]
as a bridge in your routing - for example, using persistent queues to
enable robust routing. Notice that if you also have *transferExchange*
enabled, this option takes precedence. The caught exception is required
to be serializable. The original `Exception` on the consumer side can be
wrapped in an outer exception such as
`org.apache.camel.RuntimeCamelException` when returned to the producer.

|`transferFault` |`false` |*Camel 2.17:* If enabled and you are using
Request Reply messaging (InOut) and an Exchange failed with a SOAP fault
(not exception) on the consumer side, then the fault flag on
org.apache.camel.Message.isFault() will be send back in the response as
a JMS header with the key JmsConstants.JMS_TRANSFER_FAULT. If the client
is Camel, the returned fault flag will be set on the
org.apache.camel.Message.setFault(boolean). You may want to enable this
when using Camel components that support faults such as SOAP based such
as cxf or spring-ws.

|`transferExchange` |`false` |You can transfer the exchange over the
wire instead of just the body and headers. The following fields are
transferred: In body, Out body, Fault body, In headers, Out headers,
Fault headers, exchange properties, exchange exception. This requires
that the objects are serializable. Camel will exclude any
non-serializable objects and log it at `WARN` level. You *must* enable
this option on both the producer and consumer side, so Camel knows the
payloads is an Exchange and not a regular payload.

|`username` |`null` |The username for the connector factory.

|`useMessageIDAsCorrelationID` |`false` |Specifies whether
`JMSMessageID` should always be used as `JMSCorrelationID` for *InOut*
messages.

|`useVersion102` |`false` |*@deprecated (removed from Camel 2.5
onwards):* Specifies whether the old JMS API should be used.
|=======================================================================

[[JMS-MessageMappingbetweenJMSandCamel]]
Message Mapping between JMS and Camel
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Camel automatically maps messages between `javax.jms.Message` and
`org.apache.camel.Message`.

When sending a JMS message, Camel converts the message body to the
following JMS message types:

[width="100%",cols="10%,10%,80%",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Body Type |JMS Message |Comment
|`String` |`javax.jms.TextMessage` | 

|`org.w3c.dom.Node` |`javax.jms.TextMessage` |The DOM will be converted
to `String`.

|`Map` |`javax.jms.MapMessage` | 

|`java.io.Serializable` |`javax.jms.ObjectMessage` | 

|`byte[]` |`javax.jms.BytesMessage` | 

|`java.io.File` |`javax.jms.BytesMessage` | 

|`java.io.Reader` |`javax.jms.BytesMessage` | 

|`java.io.InputStream` |`javax.jms.BytesMessage` | 

|`java.nio.ByteBuffer` |`javax.jms.BytesMessage` | 
|=======================================================================

When receiving a JMS message, Camel converts the JMS message to the
following body type:

[width="100%",cols="50%,50%",options="header",]
|=============================================
|JMS Message |Body Type
|`javax.jms.TextMessage` |`String`
|`javax.jms.BytesMessage` |`byte[]`
|`javax.jms.MapMessage` |`Map<String, Object>`
|`javax.jms.ObjectMessage` |`Object`
|=============================================

[[JMS-Disablingauto-mappingofJMSmessages]]
Disabling auto-mapping of JMS messages
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

You can use the `mapJmsMessage` option to disable the auto-mapping
above. If disabled, Camel will not try to map the received JMS message,
but instead uses it directly as the payload. This allows you to avoid
the overhead of mapping and let Camel just pass through the JMS message.
For instance, it even allows you to route `javax.jms.ObjectMessage` JMS
messages with classes you do *not* have on the classpath.

[[JMS-UsingacustomMessageConverter]]
Using a custom MessageConverter
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

You can use the `messageConverter` option to do the mapping yourself in
a Spring `org.springframework.jms.support.converter.MessageConverter`
class.

For example, in the route below we use a custom message converter when
sending a message to the JMS order queue:

[source,java]
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  from("file://inbox/order").to("jms:queue:order?messageConverter=#myMessageConverter");
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

You can also use a custom message converter when consuming from a JMS
destination.

[[JMS-Controllingthemappingstrategyselected]]
Controlling the mapping strategy selected
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

You can use the *jmsMessageType* option on the endpoint URL to force a
specific message type for all messages. +
 In the route below, we poll files from a folder and send them as
`javax.jms.TextMessage` as we have forced the JMS producer endpoint to
use text messages:

[source,java]
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
  from("file://inbox/order").to("jms:queue:order?jmsMessageType=Text");
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

You can also specify the message type to use for each messabe by setting
the header with the key `CamelJmsMessageType`. For example:

[source,java]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  from("file://inbox/order").setHeader("CamelJmsMessageType", JmsMessageType.Text).to("jms:queue:order");
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The possible values are defined in the `enum` class,
`org.apache.camel.jms.JmsMessageType`.

[[JMS-Messageformatwhensending]]
Message format when sending
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The exchange that is sent over the JMS wire must conform to the
http://java.sun.com/j2ee/1.4/docs/api/javax/jms/Message.html[JMS Message
spec].

For the `exchange.in.header` the following rules apply for the header
**keys**:

* Keys starting with `JMS` or `JMSX` are reserved.
* `exchange.in.headers` keys must be literals and all be valid Java
identifiers (do not use dots in the key name).
* Camel replaces dots & hyphens and the reverse when when consuming JMS
messages: +
 `.` is replaced by `_DOT_` and the reverse replacement when Camel
consumes the message. +
 `-` is replaced by `_HYPHEN_` and the reverse replacement when Camel
consumes the message.
* See also the option `jmsKeyFormatStrategy`, which allows use of your
own custom strategy for formatting keys.

For the `exchange.in.header`, the following rules apply for the header
**values**:

* The values must be primitives or their counter objects (such as
`Integer`, `Long`, `Character`). The types, `String`, `CharSequence`,
`Date`, `BigDecimal` and `BigInteger` are all converted to their
`toString()` representation. All other types are dropped.

Camel will log with category `org.apache.camel.component.jms.JmsBinding`
at *DEBUG* level if it drops a given header value. For example:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2008-07-09 06:43:04,046 [main           ] DEBUG JmsBinding
  - Ignoring non primitive header: order of class: org.apache.camel.component.jms.issues.DummyOrder with value: DummyOrder{orderId=333, itemId=4444, quantity=2}
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[JMS-Messageformatwhenreceiving]]
Message format when receiving
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Camel adds the following properties to the `Exchange` when it receives a
message:

[width="100%",cols="10%,10%,80%",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Property |Type |Description
|`org.apache.camel.jms.replyDestination` |`javax.jms.Destination` |The
reply destination.
|=======================================================================

Camel adds the following JMS properties to the In message headers when
it receives a JMS message:

[width="100%",cols="10%,10%,80%",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Header |Type |Description
|`JMSCorrelationID` |`String` |The JMS correlation ID.

|`JMSDeliveryMode` |`int` |The JMS delivery mode.

|`JMSDestination` |`javax.jms.Destination` |The JMS destination.

|`JMSExpiration` |`long` |The JMS expiration.

|`JMSMessageID` |`String` |The JMS unique message ID.

|`JMSPriority` |`int` |The JMS priority (with 0 as the lowest priority
and 9 as the highest).

|`JMSRedelivered` |`boolean` |Is the JMS message redelivered.

|`JMSReplyTo` |`javax.jms.Destination` |The JMS reply-to destination.

|`JMSTimestamp` |`long` |The JMS timestamp.

|`JMSType` |`String` |The JMS type.

|`JMSXGroupID` |`String` |The JMS group ID.
|=======================================================================

As all the above information is standard JMS you can check the
http://java.sun.com/javaee/5/docs/api/javax/jms/Message.html[JMS
documentation] for further details.

[[JMS-AboutusingCameltosendandreceivemessagesandJMSReplyTo]]
About using Camel to send and receive messages and JMSReplyTo
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The JMS component is complex and you have to pay close attention to how
it works in some cases. So this is a short summary of some of the
areas/pitfalls to look for.

When Camel sends a message using its `JMSProducer`, it checks the
following conditions:

* The message exchange pattern,
* Whether a `JMSReplyTo` was set in the endpoint or in the message
headers,
* Whether any of the following options have been set on the JMS
endpoint: `disableReplyTo`, `preserveMessageQos`, `explicitQosEnabled`.

All this can be a tad complex to understand and configure to support
your use case.

[[JMS-JmsProducer]]
JmsProducer
+++++++++++

The `JmsProducer` behaves as follows, depending on configuration:

[width="100%",cols="10%,10%,80%",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Exchange Pattern |Other options |Description
|_InOut_ |- |Camel will expect a reply, set a temporary `JMSReplyTo`,
and after sending the message, it will start to listen for the reply
message on the temporary queue.

|_InOut_ |`JMSReplyTo` is set |Camel will expect a reply and, after
sending the message, it will start to listen for the reply message on
the specified `JMSReplyTo` queue.

|_InOnly_ |- |Camel will send the message and *not* expect a reply.

|_InOnly_ |`JMSReplyTo` is set |By default, Camel discards the
`JMSReplyTo` destination and clears the `JMSReplyTo` header before
sending the message. Camel then sends the message and does *not* expect
a reply. Camel logs this in the log at `WARN` level (changed to `DEBUG`
level from *Camel 2.6* onwards. You can use `preserveMessageQuo=true` to
instruct Camel to keep the `JMSReplyTo`. In all situations the
`JmsProducer` does *not* expect any reply and thus continue after
sending the message.
|=======================================================================

[[JMS-JmsConsumer]]
JmsConsumer
+++++++++++

The `JmsConsumer` behaves as follows, depending on configuration:

[width="100%",cols="10%,10%,80%",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Exchange Pattern |Other options |Description
|_InOut_ |- |Camel will send the reply back to the `JMSReplyTo` queue.

|_InOnly_ |- |Camel will not send a reply back, as the pattern is
__InOnly__.

|- |`disableReplyTo=true` |This option suppresses replies.
|=======================================================================

So pay attention to the message exchange pattern set on your exchanges.

If you send a message to a JMS destination in the middle of your route
you can specify the exchange pattern to use, see more at
link:request-reply.html[Request Reply]. +
 This is useful if you want to send an `InOnly` message to a JMS topic:

[source,java]
------------------------------------------------------
from("activemq:queue:in")
   .to("bean:validateOrder")
   .to(ExchangePattern.InOnly, "activemq:topic:order")
   .to("bean:handleOrder");
------------------------------------------------------

[[JMS-Reuseendpointandsendtodifferentdestinationscomputedatruntime]]
Reuse endpoint and send to different destinations computed at runtime
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If you need to send messages to a lot of different JMS destinations, it
makes sense to reuse a JMS endpoint and specify the real destination in
a message header. This allows Camel to reuse the same endpoint, but send
to different destinations. This greatly reduces the number of endpoints
created and economizes on memory and thread resources.

You can specify the destination in the following headers:

[width="100%",cols="10%,10%,80%",options="header",]
|=====================================================================
|Header |Type |Description
|`CamelJmsDestination` |`javax.jms.Destination` |A destination object.
|`CamelJmsDestinationName` |`String` |The destination name.
|=====================================================================

For example, the following route shows how you can compute a destination
at run time and use it to override the destination appearing in the JMS
URL:

[source,java]
--------------------------------
from("file://inbox")
  .to("bean:computeDestination")
  .to("activemq:queue:dummy");
--------------------------------

The queue name, `dummy`, is just a placeholder. It must be provided as
part of the JMS endpoint URL, but it will be ignored in this example.

In the `computeDestination` bean, specify the real destination by
setting the `CamelJmsDestinationName` header as follows:

[source,java]
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
public void setJmsHeader(Exchange exchange) {
   String id = ....
   exchange.getIn().setHeader("CamelJmsDestinationName", "order:" + id");
}
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Then Camel will read this header and use it as the destination instead
of the one configured on the endpoint. So, in this example Camel sends
the message to `activemq:queue:order:2`, assuming the `id` value was 2.

If both the `CamelJmsDestination` and the `CamelJmsDestinationName`
headers are set, `CamelJmsDestination` takes priority. Keep in mind that
the JMS producer removes both `CamelJmsDestination` and
`CamelJmsDestinationName` headers from the exchange and do not propagate
them to the created JMS message in order to avoid the accidental loops
in the routes (in scenarios when the message will be forwarded to the
another JMS endpoint).

[[JMS-ConfiguringdifferentJMSproviders]]
Configuring different JMS providers
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

You can configure your JMS provider in link:spring.html[Spring] XML as
follows:

Basically, you can configure as many JMS component instances as you wish
and give them *a unique name using the* `id` **attribute**. The
preceding example configures an `activemq` component. You could do the
same to configure MQSeries, TibCo, BEA, Sonic and so on.

Once you have a named JMS component, you can then refer to endpoints
within that component using URIs. For example for the component name,
`activemq`, you can then refer to destinations using the URI format,
`activemq:[queue:|topic:]destinationName`. You can use the same approach
for all other JMS providers.

This works by the SpringCamelContext lazily fetching components from the
spring context for the scheme name you use for
link:endpoint.html[Endpoint] link:uris.html[URIs] and having the
link:component.html[Component] resolve the endpoint URIs.

[[JMS-UsingJNDItofindtheConnectionFactory]]
Using JNDI to find the ConnectionFactory
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

If you are using a J2EE container, you might need to look up JNDI to
find the JMS `ConnectionFactory` rather than use the usual `<bean>`
mechanism in Spring. You can do this using Spring's factory bean or the
new Spring XML namespace. For example:

[source,xml]
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
<bean id="weblogic" class="org.apache.camel.component.jms.JmsComponent">
  <property name="connectionFactory" ref="myConnectionFactory"/>
</bean>

<jee:jndi-lookup id="myConnectionFactory" jndi-name="jms/connectionFactory"/>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

See
http://static.springsource.org/spring/docs/3.0.x/spring-framework-reference/html/xsd-config.html#xsd-config-body-schemas-jee[The
jee schema] in the Spring reference documentation for more details about
JNDI lookup.

[[JMS-ConcurrentConsuming]]
Concurrent Consuming
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A common requirement with JMS is to consume messages concurrently in
multiple threads in order to make an application more responsive. You
can set the `concurrentConsumers` option to specify the number of
threads servicing the JMS endpoint, as follows:

[source,java]
---------------------------------------------
from("jms:SomeQueue?concurrentConsumers=20").
  bean(MyClass.class);
---------------------------------------------

You can configure this option in one of the following ways:

* On the `JmsComponent`,
* On the endpoint URI or,
* By invoking `setConcurrentConsumers()` directly on the `JmsEndpoint`.

[[JMS-ConcurrentConsumingwithasyncconsumer]]
Concurrent Consuming with async consumer
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Notice that each concurrent consumer will only pickup the next available
message from the JMS broker, when the current message has been fully
processed. You can set the option `asyncConsumer=true` to let the
consumer pickup the next message from the JMS queue, while the previous
message is being processed asynchronously (by the
link:asynchronous-routing-engine.html[Asynchronous Routing Engine]). See
more details in the table on top of the page about the `asyncConsumer`
option.

[source,java]
----------------------------------------------------------------
from("jms:SomeQueue?concurrentConsumers=20&asyncConsumer=true").
  bean(MyClass.class);
----------------------------------------------------------------

[[JMS-Request-replyoverJMS]]
Request-reply over JMS
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Camel supports link:request-reply.html[Request Reply] over JMS. In
essence the MEP of the Exchange should be `InOut` when you send a
message to a JMS queue.

Camel offers a number of options to configure request/reply over JMS
that influence performance and clustered environments. The table below
summaries the options.

[width="100%",cols="10%,10%,10%,70%",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Option |Performance |Cluster |Description
|`Temporary` |Fast |Yes |A temporary queue is used as reply queue, and
automatic created by Camel. To use this do *not* specify a replyTo queue
name. And you can optionally configure `replyToType=Temporary` to make
it stand out that temporary queues are in use.

|`Shared` |Slow |Yes |A shared persistent queue is used as reply queue.
The queue must be created beforehand, although some brokers can create
them on the fly such as Apache ActiveMQ. To use this you must specify
the replyTo queue name. And you can optionally configure
`replyToType=Shared` to make it stand out that shared queues are in use.
A shared queue can be used in a clustered environment with multiple
nodes running this Camel application at the same time. All using the
same shared reply queue. This is possible because JMS Message selectors
are used to correlate expected reply messages; this impacts performance
though. JMS Message selectors is slower, and therefore not as fast as
`Temporary` or `Exclusive` queues. See further below how to tweak this
for better performance.

|`Exclusive` |Fast |No (*Yes) |An exclusive persistent queue is used as
reply queue. The queue must be created beforehand, although some brokers
can create them on the fly such as Apache ActiveMQ. To use this you must
specify the replyTo queue name. And you *must* configure
`replyToType=Exclusive` to instruct Camel to use exclusive queues, as
`Shared` is used by default, if a `replyTo` queue name was configured.
When using exclusive reply queues, then JMS Message selectors are *not*
in use, and therefore other applications must not use this queue as
well. An exclusive queue *cannot* be used in a clustered environment
with multiple nodes running this Camel application at the same time; as
we do not have control if the reply queue comes back to the same node
that sent the request message; that is why shared queues use JMS Message
selectors to make sure of this. *Though* if you configure each Exclusive
reply queue with an unique name per node, then you can run this in a
clustered environment. As then the reply message will be sent back to
that queue for the given node, that awaits the reply message.

|`concurrentConsumers` |Fast |Yes |*Camel 2.10.3:* Allows to process
reply messages concurrently using concurrent message listeners in use.
You can specify a range using the `concurrentConsumers` and
`maxConcurrentConsumers` options. *Notice:* That using `Shared` reply
queues may not work as well with concurrent listeners, so use this
option with care.

|`maxConcurrentConsumers` |Fast |Yes |*Camel 2.10.3:* Allows to process
reply messages concurrently using concurrent message listeners in use.
You can specify a range using the `concurrentConsumers` and
`maxConcurrentConsumers` options. *Notice:* That using `Shared` reply
queues may not work as well with concurrent listeners, so use this
option with care.
|=======================================================================

The `JmsProducer` detects the `InOut` and provides a `JMSReplyTo` header
with the reply destination to be used. By default Camel uses a temporary
queue, but you can use the `replyTo` option on the endpoint to specify a
fixed reply queue (see more below about fixed reply queue).

Camel will automatic setup a consumer which listen on the reply queue,
so you should *not* do anything. +
 This consumer is a Spring `DefaultMessageListenerContainer` which
listen for replies. However it's fixed to 1 concurrent consumer. +
 That means replies will be processed in sequence as there are only 1
thread to process the replies. If you want to process replies faster,
then we need to use concurrency. But *not* using the
`concurrentConsumer` option. We should use the `threads` from the Camel
DSL instead, as shown in the route below:

Instead of using threads, then use concurrentConsumers option if using
Camel 2.10.3 or better. See further below.

[source,java]
---------------------------------
from(xxx)
.inOut().to("activemq:queue:foo")
.threads(5)
.to(yyy)
.to(zzz);
---------------------------------

In this route we instruct Camel to route replies
link:async.html[asynchronously] using a thread pool with 5 threads.

From *Camel 2.10.3* onwards you can now configure the listener to use
concurrent threads using the `concurrentConsumers` and
`maxConcurrentConsumers` options. This allows you to easier configure
this in Camel as shown below:

[source,java]
-------------------------------------------------------
from(xxx)
.inOut().to("activemq:queue:foo?concurrentConsumers=5")
.to(yyy)
.to(zzz);
-------------------------------------------------------

[[JMS-Request-replyoverJMSandusingasharedfixedreplyqueue]]
Request-reply over JMS and using a shared fixed reply queue
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

If you use a fixed reply queue when doing
link:request-reply.html[Request Reply] over JMS as shown in the example
below, then pay attention.

[source,java]
---------------------------------------------
from(xxx)
.inOut().to("activemq:queue:foo?replyTo=bar")
.to(yyy)
---------------------------------------------

In this example the fixed reply queue named "bar" is used. By default
Camel assumes the queue is shared when using fixed reply queues, and
therefore it uses a `JMSSelector` to only pickup the expected reply
messages (eg based on the `JMSCorrelationID`). See next section for
exclusive fixed reply queues. That means its not as fast as temporary
queues. You can speedup how often Camel will pull for reply messages
using the `receiveTimeout` option. By default its 1000 millis. So to
make it faster you can set it to 250 millis to pull 4 times per second
as shown:

[source,java]
----------------------------------------------------------------
from(xxx)
.inOut().to("activemq:queue:foo?replyTo=bar&receiveTimeout=250")
.to(yyy)
----------------------------------------------------------------

Notice this will cause the Camel to send pull requests to the message
broker more frequent, and thus require more network traffic. +
 It is generally recommended to use temporary queues if possible.

[[JMS-Request-replyoverJMSandusinganexclusivefixedreplyqueue]]
Request-reply over JMS and using an exclusive fixed reply queue
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

*Available as of Camel 2.9*

In the previous example, Camel would anticipate the fixed reply queue
named "bar" was shared, and thus it uses a `JMSSelector` to only consume
reply messages which it expects. However there is a drawback doing this
as JMS selectos is slower. Also the consumer on the reply queue is
slower to update with new JMS selector ids. In fact it only updates when
the `receiveTimeout` option times out, which by default is 1 second. So
in theory the reply messages could take up till about 1 sec to be
detected. On the other hand if the fixed reply queue is exclusive to the
Camel reply consumer, then we can avoid using the JMS selectors, and
thus be more performant. In fact as fast as using temporary queues. So
in *Camel 2.9* onwards we introduced the `ReplyToType` option which you
can configure to `Exclusive` +
 to tell Camel that the reply queue is exclusive as shown in the example
below:

[source,java]
-------------------------------------------------------------------
from(xxx)
.inOut().to("activemq:queue:foo?replyTo=bar&replyToType=Exclusive")
.to(yyy)
-------------------------------------------------------------------

Mind that the queue must be exclusive to each and every endpoint. So if
you have two routes, then they each need an unique reply queue as shown
in the next example:

[source,java]
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
from(xxx)
.inOut().to("activemq:queue:foo?replyTo=bar&replyToType=Exclusive")
.to(yyy)

from(aaa)
.inOut().to("activemq:queue:order?replyTo=order.reply&replyToType=Exclusive")
.to(bbb)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The same applies if you run in a clustered environment. Then each node
in the cluster must use an unique reply queue name. As otherwise each
node in the cluster may pickup messages which was intended as a reply on
another node. For clustered environments its recommended to use shared
reply queues instead.

[[JMS-Synchronizingclocksbetweensendersandreceivers]]
Synchronizing clocks between senders and receivers
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When doing messaging between systems, its desirable that the systems
have synchronized clocks. For example when sending a link:jms.html[JMS]
message, then you can set a time to live value on the message. Then the
receiver can inspect this value, and determine if the message is already
expired, and thus drop the message instead of consume and process it.
However this requires that both sender and receiver have synchronized
clocks. If you are using http://activemq.apache.org/[ActiveMQ] then you
can use the http://activemq.apache.org/timestampplugin.html[timestamp
plugin] to synchronize clocks.

[[JMS-Abouttimetolive]]
About time to live
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Read first above about synchronized clocks.

When you do request/reply (InOut) over link:jms.html[JMS] with Camel
then Camel uses a timeout on the sender side, which is default 20
seconds from the `requestTimeout` option. You can control this by
setting a higher/lower value. However the time to live value is still
set on the link:jms.html[JMS] message being send. So that requires the
clocks to be synchronized between the systems. If they are not, then you
may want to disable the time to live value being set. This is now
possible using the `disableTimeToLive` option from *Camel 2.8* onwards.
So if you set this option to `disableTimeToLive=true`, then Camel does
*not* set any time to live value when sending link:jms.html[JMS]
messages. *But* the request timeout is still active. So for example if
you do request/reply over link:jms.html[JMS] and have disabled time to
live, then Camel will still use a timeout by 20 seconds (the
`requestTimeout` option). That option can of course also be configured.
So the two options `requestTimeout` and `disableTimeToLive` gives you
fine grained control when doing request/reply.

From *Camel 2.13/2.12.3* onwards you can provide a header in the message
to override and use as the request timeout value instead of the endpoint
configured value. For example:

[source,java]
--------------------------------------------------------
   from("direct:someWhere")
     .to("jms:queue:foo?replyTo=bar&requestTimeout=30s")
     .to("bean:processReply");
--------------------------------------------------------

In the route above we have a endpoint configured `requestTimeout` of 30
seconds. So Camel will wait up till 30 seconds for that reply message to
come back on the bar queue. If no reply message is received then a
`org.apache.camel.ExchangeTimedOutException` is set on the
link:exchange.html[Exchange] and Camel continues routing the message,
which would then fail due the exception, and Camel's error handler
reacts.

If you want to use a per message timeout value, you can set the header
with key
`org.apache.camel.component.jms.JmsConstants#JMS_REQUEST_TIMEOUT` which
has constant value `"CamelJmsRequestTimeout"` with a timeout value as
long type.

For example we can use a bean to compute the timeout value per
individual message, such as calling the `"whatIsTheTimeout"` method on
the service bean as shown below:

[source,java]
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   from("direct:someWhere")
     .setHeader("CamelJmsRequestTimeout", method(ServiceBean.class, "whatIsTheTimeout"))
     .to("jms:queue:foo?replyTo=bar&requestTimeout=30s")
     .to("bean:processReply");
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

When you do fire and forget (InOut) over link:jms.html[JMS] with Camel
then Camel by default does *not* set any time to live value on the
message. You can configure a value by using the `timeToLive` option. For
example to indicate a 5 sec., you set `timeToLive=5000`. The option
`disableTimeToLive` can be used to force disabling the time to live,
also for InOnly messaging. The `requestTimeout` option is not being used
for InOnly messaging.

[[JMS-EnablingTransactedConsumption]]
Enabling Transacted Consumption
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A common requirement is to consume from a queue in a transaction and
then process the message using the Camel route. To do this, just ensure
that you set the following properties on the component/endpoint:

* `transacted` = true
* `transactionManager` = a _Transsaction Manager_ - typically the
`JmsTransactionManager`

See the link:transactional-client.html[Transactional Client] EIP pattern
for further details.

Transactions and [Request Reply] over JMS

When using link:request-reply.html[Request Reply] over JMS you cannot
use a single transaction; JMS will not send any messages until a commit
is performed, so the server side won't receive anything at all until the
transaction commits. Therefore to use link:request-reply.html[Request
Reply] you must commit a transaction after sending the request and then
use a separate transaction for receiving the response.

To address this issue the JMS component uses different properties to
specify transaction use for oneway messaging and request reply
messaging:

The `transacted` property applies *only* to the InOnly message
link:exchange-pattern.html[Exchange Pattern] (MEP).

The `transactedInOut` property applies to the
InOut(link:request-reply.html[Request Reply]) message
link:exchange-pattern.html[Exchange Pattern] (MEP).

If you want to use transactions for link:request-reply.html[Request
Reply](InOut MEP), you *must* set `transactedInOut=true`.

*Available as of Camel 2.10*

You can leverage the
http://static.springsource.org/spring/docs/3.0.x/javadoc-api/org/springframework/jms/listener/AbstractPollingMessageListenerContainer.html#setSessionTransacted(boolean)[DMLC
transacted session API] using the following properties on
component/endpoint:

* `transacted` = true
* `lazyCreateTransactionManager` = false

The benefit of doing so is that the cacheLevel setting will be honored
when using local transactions without a configured TransactionManager.
When a TransactionManager is configured, no caching happens at DMLC
level and its necessary to rely on a pooled connection factory. For more
details about this kind of setup see
http://tmielke.blogspot.com/2012/03/camel-jms-with-transactions-lessons.html[here]
and
http://forum.springsource.org/showthread.php?123631-JMS-DMLC-not-caching%20connection-when-using-TX-despite-cacheLevel-CACHE_CONSUMER&p=403530&posted=1#post403530[here].

[[JMS-UsingJMSReplyToforlatereplies]]
Using JMSReplyTo for late replies
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When using Camel as a JMS listener, it sets an Exchange property with
the value of the ReplyTo `javax.jms.Destination` object, having the key
`ReplyTo`. You can obtain this `Destination` as follows:

[source,java]
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Destination replyDestination = exchange.getIn().getHeader(JmsConstants.JMS_REPLY_DESTINATION, Destination.class);
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

And then later use it to send a reply using regular JMS or Camel.

[source,java]
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    // we need to pass in the JMS component, and in this sample we use ActiveMQ
    JmsEndpoint endpoint = JmsEndpoint.newInstance(replyDestination, activeMQComponent);
    // now we have the endpoint we can use regular Camel API to send a message to it
    template.sendBody(endpoint, "Here is the late reply.");
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A different solution to sending a reply is to provide the
`replyDestination` object in the same Exchange property when sending.
Camel will then pick up this property and use it for the real
destination. The endpoint URI must include a dummy destination, however.
For example:

[source,java]
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    // we pretend to send it to some non existing dummy queue
    template.send("activemq:queue:dummy, new Processor() {
        public void process(Exchange exchange) throws Exception {
            // and here we override the destination with the ReplyTo destination object so the message is sent to there instead of dummy
            exchange.getIn().setHeader(JmsConstants.JMS_DESTINATION, replyDestination);
            exchange.getIn().setBody("Here is the late reply.");
        }
    }
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[JMS-Usingarequesttimeout]]
Using a request timeout
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In the sample below we send a link:request-reply.html[Request Reply]
style message link:exchange.html[Exchange] (we use the `requestBody`
method = `InOut`) to the slow queue for further processing in Camel and
we wait for a return reply:

[[JMS-Samples]]
Samples
^^^^^^^

JMS is used in many examples for other components as well. But we
provide a few samples below to get started.

[[JMS-ReceivingfromJMS]]
Receiving from JMS
++++++++++++++++++

In the following sample we configure a route that receives JMS messages
and routes the message to a POJO:

[source,java]
--------------------------------
   from("jms:queue:foo").
     to("bean:myBusinessLogic");
--------------------------------

You can of course use any of the EIP patterns so the route can be
context based. For example, here's how to filter an order topic for the
big spenders:

[source,java]
----------------------------------------------
from("jms:topic:OrdersTopic").
  filter().method("myBean", "isGoldCustomer").
    to("jms:queue:BigSpendersQueue");
----------------------------------------------

[[JMS-SendingtoaJMS]]
Sending to a JMS
++++++++++++++++

In the sample below we poll a file folder and send the file content to a
JMS topic. As we want the content of the file as a `TextMessage` instead
of a `BytesMessage`, we need to convert the body to a `String`:

[source,java]
------------------------------
from("file://orders").
  convertBodyTo(String.class).
  to("jms:topic:OrdersTopic");
------------------------------

[[JMS-UsingAnnotations]]
Using link:bean-integration.html[Annotations]
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Camel also has annotations so you can use link:pojo-consuming.html[POJO
Consuming] and link:pojo-producing.html[POJO Producing].

[[JMS-SpringDSLsample]]
Spring DSL sample
+++++++++++++++++

The preceding examples use the Java DSL. Camel also supports Spring XML
DSL. Here is the big spender sample using Spring DSL:

[source,xml]
---------------------------------------------------
<route>
  <from uri="jms:topic:OrdersTopic"/>
  <filter>
    <method bean="myBean" method="isGoldCustomer"/>
    <to uri="jms:queue:BigSpendersQueue"/>
  </filter>
</route>
---------------------------------------------------

[[JMS-Othersamples]]
Other samples
+++++++++++++

JMS appears in many of the examples for other components and EIP
patterns, as well in this Camel documentation. So feel free to browse
the documentation. If you have time, check out the this tutorial that
uses JMS but focuses on how well Spring Remoting and Camel works
together link:tutorial-jmsremoting.html[Tutorial-JmsRemoting].

[[JMS-UsingJMSasaDeadLetterQueuestoringExchange]]
Using JMS as a Dead Letter Queue storing Exchange
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Normally, when using link:jms.html[JMS] as the transport, it only
transfers the body and headers as the payload. If you want to use
link:jms.html[JMS] with a link:dead-letter-channel.html[Dead Letter
Channel], using a JMS queue as the Dead Letter Queue, then normally the
caused Exception is not stored in the JMS message. You can, however, use
the *transferExchange* option on the JMS dead letter queue to instruct
Camel to store the entire link:exchange.html[Exchange] in the queue as a
`javax.jms.ObjectMessage` that holds a
`org.apache.camel.impl.DefaultExchangeHolder`. This allows you to
consume from the Dead Letter Queue and retrieve the caused exception
from the Exchange property with the key `Exchange.EXCEPTION_CAUGHT`. The
demo below illustrates this:

[source,java]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
// setup error handler to use JMS as queue and store the entire Exchange
errorHandler(deadLetterChannel("jms:queue:dead?transferExchange=true"));
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Then you can consume from the JMS queue and analyze the problem:

[source,java]
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
from("jms:queue:dead").to("bean:myErrorAnalyzer");

// and in our bean
String body = exchange.getIn().getBody();
Exception cause = exchange.getProperty(Exchange.EXCEPTION_CAUGHT, Exception.class);
// the cause message is
String problem = cause.getMessage();
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[JMS-UsingJMSasaDeadLetterChannelstoringerroronly]]
Using JMS as a Dead Letter Channel storing error only
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

You can use JMS to store the cause error message or to store a custom
body, which you can initialize yourself. The following example uses the
link:message-translator.html[Message Translator] EIP to do a
transformation on the failed exchange before it is moved to the
link:jms.html[JMS] dead letter queue:

[source,java]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
// we sent it to a seda dead queue first
errorHandler(deadLetterChannel("seda:dead"));

// and on the seda dead queue we can do the custom transformation before its sent to the JMS queue
from("seda:dead").transform(exceptionMessage()).to("jms:queue:dead");
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Here we only store the original cause error message in the transform.
You can, however, use any link:expression.html[Expression] to send
whatever you like. For example, you can invoke a method on a Bean or use
a custom processor.

[[JMS-SendinganInOnlymessageandkeepingtheJMSReplyToheader]]
Sending an InOnly message and keeping the JMSReplyTo header
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When sending to a link:jms.html[JMS] destination using *camel-jms* the
producer will use the MEP to detect if its InOnly or InOut messaging.
However there can be times where you want to send an InOnly message but
keeping the JMSReplyTo header. To do so you have to instruct Camel to
keep it, otherwise the JMSReplyTo header will be dropped.

For example to send an InOnly message to the foo queue, but with a
JMSReplyTo with bar queue you can do as follows:

[source,java]
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
        template.send("activemq:queue:foo?preserveMessageQos=true", new Processor() {
            public void process(Exchange exchange) throws Exception {
                exchange.getIn().setBody("World");
                exchange.getIn().setHeader("JMSReplyTo", "bar");
            }
        });
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Notice we use `preserveMessageQos=true` to instruct Camel to keep the
JMSReplyTo header.

[[JMS-SettingJMSprovideroptionsonthedestination]]
Setting JMS provider options on the destination
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Some JMS providers, like IBM's WebSphere MQ need options to be set on
the JMS destination. For example, you may need to specify the
targetClient option. Since targetClient is a WebSphere MQ option and not
a Camel URI option, you need to set that on the JMS destination name
like so:

[source,java]
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
...
.setHeader("CamelJmsDestinationName", constant("queue:///MY_QUEUE?targetClient=1"))
.to("wmq:queue:MY_QUEUE?useMessageIDAsCorrelationID=true");
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Some versions of WMQ won't accept this option on the destination name
and you will get an exception like:

________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
com.ibm.msg.client.jms.DetailedJMSException: JMSCC0005: The specified
value 'MY_QUEUE?targetClient=1' is not allowed for
'XMSC_DESTINATION_NAME'
________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

A workaround is to use a custom DestinationResolver:

[source,java]
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
JmsComponent wmq = new JmsComponent(connectionFactory);

wmq.setDestinationResolver(new DestinationResolver(){
    public Destination resolveDestinationName(Session session, String destinationName, boolean pubSubDomain) throws JMSException {
        MQQueueSession wmqSession = (MQQueueSession) session;
        return wmqSession.createQueue("queue:///" + destinationName + "?targetClient=1");
    }
});
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[JMS-SeeAlso]]
See Also
^^^^^^^^

* link:configuring-camel.html[Configuring Camel]
* link:component.html[Component]
* link:endpoint.html[Endpoint]
* link:getting-started.html[Getting Started]

* link:transactional-client.html[Transactional Client]
* link:bean-integration.html[Bean Integration]
* link:tutorial-jmsremoting.html[Tutorial-JmsRemoting]
* http://activemq.apache.org/jmstemplate-gotchas.html[JMSTemplate
gotchas]
