components/camel-fury/src/main/docs/fury-dataformat.adoc, before:

= Fury DataFormat
:doctitle: Fury
:shortname: fury
:artifactid: camel-fury
:description: Serialize and deserialize messages using Apache Fury
:since: 4.9
:supportlevel: Preview
:tabs-sync-option:
//Manually maintained attributes
:camel-spring-boot-name: fury 

*Since Camel {since}*

Fury is a Data Format that uses the
https://fury.apache.org/[Fury Library]

== Fury Options


// dataformat options: START
include::partial$dataformat-options.adoc[]
// dataformat options: END


== Dependencies

To use Fury in your camel routes, you need to add the dependency
on *camel-fury* which implements this data format.

If you use maven, you could add the following to your `pom.xml`,
substituting the version number for the latest & greatest release.

[source,xml]
----------------------------------------------------------
<dependency>
  <groupId>org.apache.camel</groupId>
  <artifactId>camel-fury</artifactId>
  <version>x.x.x</version>
  <!-- use the same version as your Camel core version -->
</dependency>
----------------------------------------------------------


include::spring-boot:partial$starter.adoc[]

Commit message:

fix: Apache Fury is not supporting architecture using Big Endian
Signed-off-by: Aurélien Pupier <apupier@redhat.com>

components/camel-fury/src/main/docs/fury-dataformat.adoc, after:

= Fury DataFormat
:doctitle: Fury
:shortname: fury
:artifactid: camel-fury
:description: Serialize and deserialize messages using Apache Fury
:since: 4.9
:supportlevel: Preview
:tabs-sync-option:
//Manually maintained attributes
:camel-spring-boot-name: fury 

*Since Camel {since}*

Fury is a Data Format that uses the
https://fury.apache.org/[Fury Library]

[NOTE]
Apache Fury is not supporting architecture using Big Endian (s390x for instance).

== Fury Options


// dataformat options: START
include::partial$dataformat-options.adoc[]
// dataformat options: END


== Dependencies

To use Fury in your camel routes, you need to add the dependency
on *camel-fury* which implements this data format.

If you use maven, you could add the following to your `pom.xml`,
substituting the version number for the latest & greatest release.

[source,xml]
----------------------------------------------------------
<dependency>
  <groupId>org.apache.camel</groupId>
  <artifactId>camel-fury</artifactId>
  <version>x.x.x</version>
  <!-- use the same version as your Camel core version -->
</dependency>
----------------------------------------------------------


include::spring-boot:partial$starter.adoc[]
