core/camel-core-engine/src/main/docs/modules/eips/pages/guaranteed-delivery.adoc, before:

= Guaranteed Delivery
:tabs-sync-option:

Camel supports the
http://www.enterpriseintegrationpatterns.com/GuaranteedMessaging.html[Guaranteed
Delivery] from the xref:enterprise-integration-patterns.adoc[EIP
patterns] using among others the following components:

* xref:ROOT:file-component.adoc[File] for using file systems as a persistent store of
messages
* xref:ROOT:jms-component.adoc[JMS] when using persistent delivery, the default, for
working with JMS queues and topics for high performance, clustering and load balancing
* xref:ROOT:kafka-component.adoc[Kafka] when using persistent delivery for
working with streaming events for high performance, clustering and load balancing
* xref:ROOT:jpa-component.adoc[JPA] for using a database as a persistence layer, or use
any of the other database components such as xref:ROOT:sql-component.adoc[SQL],
xref:ROOT:jdbc-component.adoc[JDBC], or xref:ROOT:mybatis-component.adoc[MyBatis]

image::eip/GuaranteedMessagingSolution.gif[image]

== Example

The following example demonstrates illustrates the use
of http://www.enterpriseintegrationpatterns.com/GuaranteedMessaging.html[Guaranteed
Delivery] within the xref:ROOT:jms-component.adoc[JMS] component.

By default, a message
is not considered successfully delivered until the recipient has
persisted the message locally guaranteeing its receipt in the event the
destination becomes unavailable.

[tabs]
====
Java::
+
[source,java]
----
from("direct:start")
    .to("jms:queue:foo");
----

XML::
+
[source,xml]
----
<route>
    <from uri="direct:start"/>
    <to uri="jms:queue:foo"/>
</route>
----
====

Commit message:

CAMEL-23006: camel-jbang - Transform route with Kamelet EIP should stub

core/camel-core-engine/src/main/docs/modules/eips/pages/guaranteed-delivery.adoc, after:

= Guaranteed Delivery
:tabs-sync-option:

Camel supports the
http://www.enterpriseintegrationpatterns.com/GuaranteedMessaging.html[Guaranteed
Delivery] from the xref:enterprise-integration-patterns.adoc[EIP
patterns] using among others the following components:

* xref:ROOT:file-component.adoc[File] for using file systems as a persistent store of
messages
* xref:ROOT:jms-component.adoc[JMS] when using persistent delivery, the default, for
working with JMS queues and topics for high performance, clustering and load balancing
* xref:ROOT:kafka-component.adoc[Kafka] when using persistent delivery for
working with streaming events for high performance, clustering and load balancing
* xref:ROOT:jpa-component.adoc[JPA] for using a database as a persistence layer, or use
any of the other database components such as xref:ROOT:sql-component.adoc[SQL],
xref:ROOT:jdbc-component.adoc[JDBC], or xref:ROOT:mybatis-component.adoc[MyBatis]

image::eip/GuaranteedMessagingSolution.gif[image]

== Example

The following example demonstrates illustrates the use
of http://www.enterpriseintegrationpatterns.com/GuaranteedMessaging.html[Guaranteed
Delivery] within the xref:ROOT:jms-component.adoc[JMS] component.

By default, a message
is not considered successfully delivered until the recipient has
persisted the message locally guaranteeing its receipt in the event the
destination becomes unavailable.

[tabs]
====
Java::
+
[source,java]
----
from("direct:start")
    .to("jms:queue:foo");
----

XML::
+
[source,xml]
----
<route>
    <from uri="direct:start"/>
    <to uri="jms:queue:foo"/>
</route>
----

YAML::
+
[source,yaml]
----
- route:
    from:
      uri: direct:start
      steps:
        - to:
            uri: jms:queue:foo
----
====
