components/camel-aws/camel-aws-secrets-manager/src/main/docs/aws-secrets-manager-component.adoc, before:

= AWS Secrets Manager Component
:doctitle: AWS Secrets Manager
:shortname: aws-secrets-manager
:artifactid: camel-aws-secrets-manager
:description: Manage secrets using AWS Secrets Manager.
:since: 3.9
:supportlevel: Stable
:tabs-sync-option:
:component-header: Only producer is supported
//Manually maintained attributes
:group: AWS
:camel-spring-boot-name: aws-secrets-manager

*Since Camel {since}*

*{component-header}*

The AWS Secrets Manager component supports https://aws.amazon.com/secrets-manager/[AWS Secrets Manager] service.

Prerequisites

You must have a valid Amazon Web Services developer account, and be
signed up to use Amazon Secrets Manager. More information is available at
https://aws.amazon.com/secrets-manager/[AWS Secrets Manager].


== URI Format

-------------------------
aws-secrets-manager://label[?options]
-------------------------

You can append query options to the URI in the following format:

`?options=value&option2=value&...`


// component-configure options: START

// component-configure options: END

// component options: START
include::partial$component-configure-options.adoc[]
include::partial$component-endpoint-options.adoc[]
// component options: END

// endpoint options: START

// endpoint options: END

=== Static credentials, Default Credential Provider and Profile Credentials Provider

You have the possibility of avoiding the usage of explicit static credentials by specifying the useDefaultCredentialsProvider option and set it to true.

The order of evaluation for Default Credentials Provider is the following:

 - Java system properties - `aws.accessKeyId` and `aws.secretKey`.
 - Environment variables - `AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID` and `AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY`.
 - Web Identity Token from AWS STS.
 - The shared credentials and config files.
 - Amazon ECS container credentials - loaded from the Amazon ECS if the environment variable `AWS_CONTAINER_CREDENTIALS_RELATIVE_URI` is set.
 - Amazon EC2 Instance profile credentials. 
 
You have also the possibility of using Profile Credentials Provider, by specifying the useProfileCredentialsProvider option to true and profileCredentialsName to the profile name.

Only one of static, default and profile credentials could be used at the same time.

For more information about this you can look at https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sdk-for-java/latest/developer-guide/credentials.html[AWS credentials documentation]

=== Using AWS Secrets Manager Property Function

To use this function, you'll need to provide credentials to AWS Secrets Manager Service as environment variables:

[source,bash]
----
export CAMEL_VAULT_AWS_ACCESS_KEY=accessKey
export CAMEL_VAULT_AWS_SECRET_KEY=secretKey
export CAMEL_VAULT_AWS_REGION=region
----

You can also configure the credentials in the `application.properties` file such as:

[source,properties]
----
camel.vault.aws.accessKey = accessKey
camel.vault.aws.secretKey = secretKey
camel.vault.aws.region = region
----

If you want instead to use the https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sdk-for-java/latest/developer-guide/credentials.html[AWS default credentials provider], you'll need to provide the following env variables:

[source,bash]
----
export CAMEL_VAULT_AWS_USE_DEFAULT_CREDENTIALS_PROVIDER=true
export CAMEL_VAULT_AWS_REGION=region
----

You can also configure the credentials in the `application.properties` file such as:

[source,properties]
----
camel.vault.aws.defaultCredentialsProvider = true
camel.vault.aws.region = region
----

It is also possible to specify a particular profile name for accessing AWS Secrets Manager

[source,bash]
----
export CAMEL_VAULT_AWS_USE_PROFILE_CREDENTIALS_PROVIDER=true
export CAMEL_VAULT_AWS_PROFILE_NAME=test-account
export CAMEL_VAULT_AWS_REGION=region
----

You can also configure the credentials in the `application.properties` file such as:

[source,properties]
----
camel.vault.aws.profileCredentialsProvider = true
camel.vault.aws.profileName = test-account
camel.vault.aws.region = region
----

NOTE: `camel.vault.aws` configuration only applies to the AWS Secrets Manager properties function (E.g when resolving properties).
When using the `operation` option to create, get, list secrets etc., you should provide the usual options for connecting to AWS Services.

At this point, you'll be able to reference a property in the following way:

[source,xml]
----
<camelContext>
    <route>
        <from uri="direct:start"/>
        <to uri="{{aws:route}}"/>
    </route>
</camelContext>
----

Where route will be the name of the secret stored in the AWS Secrets Manager Service.

You could specify a default value in case the secret is not present on AWS Secret Manager:

[source,xml]
----
<camelContext>
    <route>
        <from uri="direct:start"/>
        <to uri="{{aws:route:default}}"/>
    </route>
</camelContext>
----

In this case, if the secret doesn't exist, the property will fall back to "default" as value.

Also, you are able to get a particular field of the secret, if you have, for example, a secret named database of this form:

[source,bash]
----
{
  "username": "admin",
  "password": "password123",
  "engine": "postgres",
  "host": "127.0.0.1",
  "port": "3128",
  "dbname": "db"
}
----

You're able to do get single secret value in your route, like for example:

[source,xml]
----
<camelContext>
    <route>
        <from uri="direct:start"/>
        <log message="Username is {{aws:database#username}}"/>
    </route>
</camelContext>
----

Or re-use the property as part of an endpoint.

You could specify a default value in case the particular field of secret is not present on AWS Secret Manager:

[source,xml]
----
<camelContext>
    <route>
        <from uri="direct:start"/>
        <log message="Username is {{aws:database#username:admin}}"/>
    </route>
</camelContext>
----

In this case, if the secret doesn't exist or the secret exists, but the username field is not part of the secret, the property will fall back to "admin" as value.

There is also the syntax to get a particular version of the secret for both the approach, with field/default value specified or only with secret:

[source,xml]
----
<camelContext>
    <route>
        <from uri="direct:start"/>
        <to uri="{{aws:route@bf9b4f4b-8e63-43fd-a73c-3e2d3748b451}}"/>
    </route>
</camelContext>
----

This approach will return the RAW route secret with the version 'bf9b4f4b-8e63-43fd-a73c-3e2d3748b451'.

[source,xml]
----
<camelContext>
    <route>
        <from uri="direct:start"/>
        <to uri="{{aws:route:default@bf9b4f4b-8e63-43fd-a73c-3e2d3748b451}}"/>
    </route>
</camelContext>
----

This approach will return the route secret value with version 'bf9b4f4b-8e63-43fd-a73c-3e2d3748b451' or default value in case the secret doesn't exist or the version doesn't exist.

[source,xml]
----
<camelContext>
    <route>
        <from uri="direct:start"/>
        <log message="Username is {{aws:database#username:admin@bf9b4f4b-8e63-43fd-a73c-3e2d3748b451}}"/>
    </route>
</camelContext>
----

This approach will return the username field of the database secret with version 'bf9b4f4b-8e63-43fd-a73c-3e2d3748b451' or admin in case the secret doesn't exist or the version doesn't exist.

For the moment we are not considering the rotation function if any are applied, but it is in the work to be done.

The only requirement is adding the camel-aws-secrets-manager jar to your Camel application.

=== Automatic Camel context reloading on Secret Refresh

Being able to reload Camel context on a Secret Refresh could be done by specifying the usual credentials (the same used for AWS Secret Manager Property Function).

With Environment variables:

[source,bash]
----
export CAMEL_VAULT_AWS_USE_DEFAULT_CREDENTIALS_PROVIDER=accessKey
export CAMEL_VAULT_AWS_REGION=region
----

or as plain Camel main properties:

[source,properties]
----
camel.vault.aws.useDefaultCredentialProvider = true
camel.vault.aws.region = region
----

Or by specifying accessKey/SecretKey and region, instead of using the default credentials provider chain.

To enable the automatic refresh, you'll need additional properties to set:

[source,properties]
----
camel.vault.aws.refreshEnabled=true
camel.vault.aws.refreshPeriod=60000
camel.vault.aws.secrets=Secret
camel.main.context-reload-enabled = true
----

where `camel.vault.aws.refreshEnabled` will enable the automatic context reload, `camel.vault.aws.refreshPeriod` is the interval of time between two different checks for update events and `camel.vault.aws.secrets` is a regex representing the secrets we want to track for updates.

Note that `camel.vault.aws.secrets` is not mandatory: if not specified the task responsible for checking updates events will take into accounts or the properties with an `aws:` prefix.

=== Automatic Camel context reloading on Secret Refresh with Eventbridge and AWS SQS Services

Another option is to use AWS EventBridge in conjunction with the AWS SQS service.

On the AWS side, the following resources need to be created:

- an AWS Couldtrail trail
- an AWS SQS Queue
- an Eventbridge rule of the following kind

[source,json]
----
{
  "source": ["aws.secretsmanager"],
  "detail-type": ["AWS API Call via CloudTrail"],
  "detail": {
    "eventSource": ["secretsmanager.amazonaws.com"]
  }
}
----

This rule will make the event related to AWS Secrets Manager filtered

- You need to set the a Rule target to the AWS SQS Queue for Eventbridge rule

- You need to give permission to the Eventbrige rule, to write on the above SQS Queue. For doing this you'll need to define a json file like this:

[source,json]
----
{
    "Policy": "{\"Version\":\"2012-10-17\",\"Id\":\"<queue_arn>/SQSDefaultPolicy\",\"Statement\":[{\"Sid\": \"EventsToMyQueue\", \"Effect\": \"Allow\", \"Principal\": {\"Service\": \"events.amazonaws.com\"}, \"Action\": \"sqs:SendMessage\", \"Resource\": \"<queue_arn>\", \"Condition\": {\"ArnEquals\": {\"aws:SourceArn\": \"<eventbridge_rule_arn>\"}}}]}"
}
----

Change the values for queue_arn and eventbridge_rule_arn, save the file with policy.json name and run the following command with AWS CLI

[source,bash]
----
aws sqs set-queue-attributes --queue-url <queue_url> --attributes file://policy.json
----

where queue_url is the AWS SQS Queue URL of the just created Queue.

Now you should be able to set up the configuration on the Camel side. To enable the SQS notification add the following properties:

[source,properties]
----
camel.vault.aws.refreshEnabled=true
camel.vault.aws.refreshPeriod=60000
camel.vault.aws.secrets=Secret
camel.main.context-reload-enabled = true
camel.vault.aws.useSqsNotification=true
camel.vault.aws.sqsQueueUrl=<queue_url>
----

where queue_url is the AWS SQS Queue URL of the just created Queue.

Whenever an event of PutSecretValue for the Secret named 'Secret' will happen, a message will be enqueued in the AWS SQS Queue and consumed on the Camel side and a context reload will be triggered.



// component headers: START
include::partial$component-endpoint-headers.adoc[]
// component headers: END

=== Secrets Manager Producer operations

Camel-AWS-Secrets-manager component provides the following operation on the producer side:

- listSecrets
- createSecret
- deleteSecret
- describeSecret
- rotateSecret
- getSecret
- batchGetSecret
- updateSecret
- replicateSecretToRegions

== Dependencies

Maven users will need to add the following dependency to their pom.xml.

*pom.xml*

[source,xml]
---------------------------------------
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.apache.camel</groupId>
    <artifactId>camel-aws-secrets-manager</artifactId>
    <version>${camel-version}</version>
</dependency>
---------------------------------------

where `$\{camel-version}` must be replaced by the actual version of Camel.


include::spring-boot:partial$starter.adoc[]

=== Using AWS Secrets Manager Property Function in Spring Boot for Early resolving properties

AWS Secrets Manager Spring Boot component starter offers the ability to early resolve properties, so the end user could resolve properties directly in the application.properties before both Spring Boot runtime and Camel context will start.

This could be accomplished in the following way. You should specified this property in your application.properties file:

[source,bash]
----
camel.component.aws-secrets-manager.early-resolve-properties=true
----

This will enable the feature so you'll be able to resolved properties, in your application.properties file, like:

[source,bash]
----
foo = aws:database/prod#password
----

Commit message:

CAMEL-21330 - Camel-AWS-Secrets-Manager: Support Properties Function with Localstack (#16063)
Signed-off-by: Andrea Cosentino <ancosen@gmail.com>

components/camel-aws/camel-aws-secrets-manager/src/main/docs/aws-secrets-manager-component.adoc, after:

= AWS Secrets Manager Component
:doctitle: AWS Secrets Manager
:shortname: aws-secrets-manager
:artifactid: camel-aws-secrets-manager
:description: Manage secrets using AWS Secrets Manager.
:since: 3.9
:supportlevel: Stable
:tabs-sync-option:
:component-header: Only producer is supported
//Manually maintained attributes
:group: AWS
:camel-spring-boot-name: aws-secrets-manager

*Since Camel {since}*

*{component-header}*

The AWS Secrets Manager component supports https://aws.amazon.com/secrets-manager/[AWS Secrets Manager] service.

Prerequisites

You must have a valid Amazon Web Services developer account, and be
signed up to use Amazon Secrets Manager. More information is available at
https://aws.amazon.com/secrets-manager/[AWS Secrets Manager].


== URI Format

-------------------------
aws-secrets-manager://label[?options]
-------------------------

You can append query options to the URI in the following format:

`?options=value&option2=value&...`


// component-configure options: START

// component-configure options: END

// component options: START
include::partial$component-configure-options.adoc[]
include::partial$component-endpoint-options.adoc[]
// component options: END

// endpoint options: START

// endpoint options: END

=== Static credentials, Default Credential Provider and Profile Credentials Provider

You have the possibility of avoiding the usage of explicit static credentials by specifying the useDefaultCredentialsProvider option and set it to true.

The order of evaluation for Default Credentials Provider is the following:

 - Java system properties - `aws.accessKeyId` and `aws.secretKey`.
 - Environment variables - `AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID` and `AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY`.
 - Web Identity Token from AWS STS.
 - The shared credentials and config files.
 - Amazon ECS container credentials - loaded from the Amazon ECS if the environment variable `AWS_CONTAINER_CREDENTIALS_RELATIVE_URI` is set.
 - Amazon EC2 Instance profile credentials. 
 
You have also the possibility of using Profile Credentials Provider, by specifying the useProfileCredentialsProvider option to true and profileCredentialsName to the profile name.

Only one of static, default and profile credentials could be used at the same time.

For more information about this you can look at https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sdk-for-java/latest/developer-guide/credentials.html[AWS credentials documentation]

=== Using AWS Secrets Manager Property Function

To use this function, you'll need to provide credentials to AWS Secrets Manager Service as environment variables:

[source,bash]
----
export CAMEL_VAULT_AWS_ACCESS_KEY=accessKey
export CAMEL_VAULT_AWS_SECRET_KEY=secretKey
export CAMEL_VAULT_AWS_REGION=region
----

You can also configure the credentials in the `application.properties` file such as:

[source,properties]
----
camel.vault.aws.accessKey = accessKey
camel.vault.aws.secretKey = secretKey
camel.vault.aws.region = region
----

If you want instead to use the https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sdk-for-java/latest/developer-guide/credentials.html[AWS default credentials provider], you'll need to provide the following env variables:

[source,bash]
----
export CAMEL_VAULT_AWS_USE_DEFAULT_CREDENTIALS_PROVIDER=true
export CAMEL_VAULT_AWS_REGION=region
----

You can also configure the credentials in the `application.properties` file such as:

[source,properties]
----
camel.vault.aws.defaultCredentialsProvider = true
camel.vault.aws.region = region
----

It is also possible to specify a particular profile name for accessing AWS Secrets Manager

[source,bash]
----
export CAMEL_VAULT_AWS_USE_PROFILE_CREDENTIALS_PROVIDER=true
export CAMEL_VAULT_AWS_PROFILE_NAME=test-account
export CAMEL_VAULT_AWS_REGION=region
----

You can also configure the credentials in the `application.properties` file such as:

[source,properties]
----
camel.vault.aws.profileCredentialsProvider = true
camel.vault.aws.profileName = test-account
camel.vault.aws.region = region
----

NOTE: `camel.vault.aws` configuration only applies to the AWS Secrets Manager properties function (E.g when resolving properties).
When using the `operation` option to create, get, list secrets etc., you should provide the usual options for connecting to AWS Services.

At this point, you'll be able to reference a property in the following way:

[source,xml]
----
<camelContext>
    <route>
        <from uri="direct:start"/>
        <to uri="{{aws:route}}"/>
    </route>
</camelContext>
----

Where route will be the name of the secret stored in the AWS Secrets Manager Service.

You could specify a default value in case the secret is not present on AWS Secret Manager:

[source,xml]
----
<camelContext>
    <route>
        <from uri="direct:start"/>
        <to uri="{{aws:route:default}}"/>
    </route>
</camelContext>
----

In this case, if the secret doesn't exist, the property will fall back to "default" as value.

Also, you are able to get a particular field of the secret, if you have, for example, a secret named database of this form:

[source,bash]
----
{
  "username": "admin",
  "password": "password123",
  "engine": "postgres",
  "host": "127.0.0.1",
  "port": "3128",
  "dbname": "db"
}
----

You're able to do get single secret value in your route, like for example:

[source,xml]
----
<camelContext>
    <route>
        <from uri="direct:start"/>
        <log message="Username is {{aws:database#username}}"/>
    </route>
</camelContext>
----

Or re-use the property as part of an endpoint.

You could specify a default value in case the particular field of secret is not present on AWS Secret Manager:

[source,xml]
----
<camelContext>
    <route>
        <from uri="direct:start"/>
        <log message="Username is {{aws:database#username:admin}}"/>
    </route>
</camelContext>
----

In this case, if the secret doesn't exist or the secret exists, but the username field is not part of the secret, the property will fall back to "admin" as value.

There is also the syntax to get a particular version of the secret for both the approach, with field/default value specified or only with secret:

[source,xml]
----
<camelContext>
    <route>
        <from uri="direct:start"/>
        <to uri="{{aws:route@bf9b4f4b-8e63-43fd-a73c-3e2d3748b451}}"/>
    </route>
</camelContext>
----

This approach will return the RAW route secret with the version 'bf9b4f4b-8e63-43fd-a73c-3e2d3748b451'.

[source,xml]
----
<camelContext>
    <route>
        <from uri="direct:start"/>
        <to uri="{{aws:route:default@bf9b4f4b-8e63-43fd-a73c-3e2d3748b451}}"/>
    </route>
</camelContext>
----

This approach will return the route secret value with version 'bf9b4f4b-8e63-43fd-a73c-3e2d3748b451' or default value in case the secret doesn't exist or the version doesn't exist.

[source,xml]
----
<camelContext>
    <route>
        <from uri="direct:start"/>
        <log message="Username is {{aws:database#username:admin@bf9b4f4b-8e63-43fd-a73c-3e2d3748b451}}"/>
    </route>
</camelContext>
----

This approach will return the username field of the database secret with version 'bf9b4f4b-8e63-43fd-a73c-3e2d3748b451' or admin in case the secret doesn't exist or the version doesn't exist.

For the moment we are not considering the rotation function if any are applied, but it is in the work to be done.

The only requirement is adding the camel-aws-secrets-manager jar to your Camel application.

=== Testing AWS Secrets Manager Property Function with Localstack

For testing purpose you might want to test the function on Localstack. To make this easier you can use the following two properties in combination with the others:

[source,properties]
----
camel.vault.aws.overrideEndpoint = true
camel.vault.aws.uriEndpointOverride = <localstack_url>
----

With this you could be able to retrieve secret with the function directly from the Localstack instance.

=== Automatic Camel context reloading on Secret Refresh

Being able to reload Camel context on a Secret Refresh could be done by specifying the usual credentials (the same used for AWS Secret Manager Property Function).

With Environment variables:

[source,bash]
----
export CAMEL_VAULT_AWS_USE_DEFAULT_CREDENTIALS_PROVIDER=accessKey
export CAMEL_VAULT_AWS_REGION=region
----

or as plain Camel main properties:

[source,properties]
----
camel.vault.aws.useDefaultCredentialProvider = true
camel.vault.aws.region = region
----

Or by specifying accessKey/SecretKey and region, instead of using the default credentials provider chain.

To enable the automatic refresh, you'll need additional properties to set:

[source,properties]
----
camel.vault.aws.refreshEnabled=true
camel.vault.aws.refreshPeriod=60000
camel.vault.aws.secrets=Secret
camel.main.context-reload-enabled = true
----

where `camel.vault.aws.refreshEnabled` will enable the automatic context reload, `camel.vault.aws.refreshPeriod` is the interval of time between two different checks for update events and `camel.vault.aws.secrets` is a regex representing the secrets we want to track for updates.

Note that `camel.vault.aws.secrets` is not mandatory: if not specified the task responsible for checking updates events will take into accounts or the properties with an `aws:` prefix.

=== Automatic Camel context reloading on Secret Refresh with Eventbridge and AWS SQS Services

Another option is to use AWS EventBridge in conjunction with the AWS SQS service.

On the AWS side, the following resources need to be created:

- an AWS Couldtrail trail
- an AWS SQS Queue
- an Eventbridge rule of the following kind

[source,json]
----
{
  "source": ["aws.secretsmanager"],
  "detail-type": ["AWS API Call via CloudTrail"],
  "detail": {
    "eventSource": ["secretsmanager.amazonaws.com"]
  }
}
----

This rule will make the event related to AWS Secrets Manager filtered

- You need to set the a Rule target to the AWS SQS Queue for Eventbridge rule

- You need to give permission to the Eventbrige rule, to write on the above SQS Queue. For doing this you'll need to define a json file like this:

[source,json]
----
{
    "Policy": "{\"Version\":\"2012-10-17\",\"Id\":\"<queue_arn>/SQSDefaultPolicy\",\"Statement\":[{\"Sid\": \"EventsToMyQueue\", \"Effect\": \"Allow\", \"Principal\": {\"Service\": \"events.amazonaws.com\"}, \"Action\": \"sqs:SendMessage\", \"Resource\": \"<queue_arn>\", \"Condition\": {\"ArnEquals\": {\"aws:SourceArn\": \"<eventbridge_rule_arn>\"}}}]}"
}
----

Change the values for queue_arn and eventbridge_rule_arn, save the file with policy.json name and run the following command with AWS CLI

[source,bash]
----
aws sqs set-queue-attributes --queue-url <queue_url> --attributes file://policy.json
----

where queue_url is the AWS SQS Queue URL of the just created Queue.

Now you should be able to set up the configuration on the Camel side. To enable the SQS notification add the following properties:

[source,properties]
----
camel.vault.aws.refreshEnabled=true
camel.vault.aws.refreshPeriod=60000
camel.vault.aws.secrets=Secret
camel.main.context-reload-enabled = true
camel.vault.aws.useSqsNotification=true
camel.vault.aws.sqsQueueUrl=<queue_url>
----

where queue_url is the AWS SQS Queue URL of the just created Queue.

Whenever an event of PutSecretValue for the Secret named 'Secret' will happen, a message will be enqueued in the AWS SQS Queue and consumed on the Camel side and a context reload will be triggered.



// component headers: START
include::partial$component-endpoint-headers.adoc[]
// component headers: END

=== Secrets Manager Producer operations

Camel-AWS-Secrets-manager component provides the following operation on the producer side:

- listSecrets
- createSecret
- deleteSecret
- describeSecret
- rotateSecret
- getSecret
- batchGetSecret
- updateSecret
- replicateSecretToRegions

== Dependencies

Maven users will need to add the following dependency to their pom.xml.

*pom.xml*

[source,xml]
---------------------------------------
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.apache.camel</groupId>
    <artifactId>camel-aws-secrets-manager</artifactId>
    <version>${camel-version}</version>
</dependency>
---------------------------------------

where `$\{camel-version}` must be replaced by the actual version of Camel.


include::spring-boot:partial$starter.adoc[]

=== Using AWS Secrets Manager Property Function in Spring Boot for Early resolving properties

AWS Secrets Manager Spring Boot component starter offers the ability to early resolve properties, so the end user could resolve properties directly in the application.properties before both Spring Boot runtime and Camel context will start.

This could be accomplished in the following way. You should specified this property in your application.properties file:

[source,bash]
----
camel.component.aws-secrets-manager.early-resolve-properties=true
----

This will enable the feature so you'll be able to resolved properties, in your application.properties file, like:

[source,bash]
----
foo = aws:database/prod#password
----
