[[UserStories-UserStories]]
=== User Stories

This page is intended as a place to collect user stories and feedback on
Apache Camel. If you are using or have tried Apache Camel please add an
entry or comment; or post to the mailing list.

[width="100%",cols="50%,50%",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Company, Product, or Project |Description
|http://activemq.apache.org/[Apache ActiveMQ] |Uses Camel to add
link:enterprise-integration-patterns.adoc[Enterprise Integration Patterns]
support into the
http://activemq.apache.org/enterprise-integration-patterns.html[ActiveMQ
broker]. If you run an out of the box ActiveMQ broker, look in
conf/camel.xml and you'll see `<camelContext>` with some example routing
rules. Can be used to bridge ActiveMQ with any of the camel
link:component.adoc[Components].

|http://servicemix.apache.org/home.html[Apache ServiceMix] |Uses Camel
as a routing engine as a
http://servicemix.apache.org/servicemix-camel.html[JBI service unit] for
use either in JBI or OSGi to route between JBI endpoints.
See the
http://servicemix.apache.org/3-beginner-using-apache-camel-inside-servicemix.html[tutorial]
or http://servicemix.apache.org/camel-example.html[example]

|https://ignite.apache.org/[Apache Ignite] |
Apache Ignite In-Memory Data Fabric is a high-performance, integrated
and distributed in-memory platform for computing and transacting on
large-scale data sets in real-time, orders of magnitude faster than
possible with traditional disk-based or flash technologies.

It uses Camel for its universal streamer.

|http://www.jboss.org/products/fuse/overview/[JBoss Fuse]
http://fusesource.com/products/enterprise-servicemix/[(formerly known as Fuse ESB)] |
Red Hat provides a commercial
distribution of an ESB which includes Camel, ActiveMQ, CXF, ServiceMix,
Karaf, http://fabric8.io/[Fabric8], and http://hawt.io/[Hawtio].

|http://tools.jboss.org/features/apachecamel.html[Tools for Apache Camel]
(formerly know as Fuse IDE) |JBoss provides developer tooling for
Camel, ActiveMQ, ServiceMix, Karaf, CXF, and
http://fabric8.io/[fabric8]. The tools is a set of Eclipse plugins, such
as a graphical Camel editor and also includes a Camel route debugger,
where you can set breakpoints in your routes.

|https://github.com/camel-idea-plugin/camel-idea-plugin[Apache Camel
IDEA Plugin] |Plugin for IntelliJ IDEA to provide a set of Apache Camel
related editing capabilities to the code editor.

|https://syndesis.io/[Syndesis] |
Syndesis is for anyone that wants to integrate services. Syndesis
includes a swish UI that enables the user to design integration flows
and manage them from their browser.

No coding required… Unless you really want to and then Syndesis allows
you to dive into the code, develop your own connectors (if one doesn’t
already exist), or hack on the integration definition directly.

|http://fabric8.io/[Fabric8] |Fabric8 is an open source integration
platform, allow to run Camel applications anywhere; whether its
on-premise or in the cloud.

|http://hawt.io/[Hawtio] |Hawtio is an open source HTML5 web
application for visualizing, managing and tracing Camel routes &
endpoints, ActiveMQ brokers, JMX, OSGi, logging, and much more.

|http://grails.org[Grails] |The http://grails.org/plugin/routing[Grails
Camel Routing Plugin] provides integration of Camel into Grails

|http://wiki.open-esb.java.net/Wiki.jsp?page=CamelSE[Open ESB Camel SE]
|Provides a JBI Service Engine for https://open-esb.dev.java.net/[Open
ESB]. See the http://blogs.sun.com/polyblog/entry/camel_fuji[example
using OpenESB and Fuji]

|http://www.subrecord.org/[SubRecord] |Uses Camel for routing and EDA
processing

|http://openehealth.org/display/ipf2/Home[Open eHealth Integration
Platform] |The Open eHealth Integration Platform (IPF) is an extension
of the Apache Camel routing and mediation engine. It has an application
programming layer based on the Groovy programming language and comes
with comprehensive support for message processing and connecting systems
in the eHealth domain.

|http://code.google.com/p/camel-soap/[Camel SOAP] |Zero code WSDL based
SOAP Client component for Apache Camel.

|http://www.opensplice.com/section-item.asp?id=964[PrismTech] |PrismTech
Simplifies Systems Integration & SOA Connectivity with Release of Open
Source OpenSplice DDS Connector for Apache Camel.

|http://github.com/hyperthunk/axiom[Axiom] |Axiom is is a framework for
testing integration scenarios and uses Apache Camel to interact with
your integration stack.

|http://www.regionh.dk/English/English.htm[Capital Region of Denmark]
|Chose to switch proprietary ESB to open source Apache Camel.

|http://www.arla.com/[Arla Foods] |Uses Camel to integrate business
backend with web application for farmers to access information about
quality of their delivered milk. Application used in numerous european
countries.

|http://akkasource.org/[Akka] |Akka uses Apache Camel to implement
additional messaging interfaces for
http://doc.akkasource.org/actors[actors]. Any Camel
http://camel.apache.org/components.html[component] can be used to send
and receive messages from Akka actors. For details refer to the
documentation of the http://doc.akkasource.org/camel[akka-camel]
extension module.

|http://jboss.org/drools[JBoss Drools]
|http://blog.athico.com/2010/07/declarative-rest-services-for-drools.html[Drools]
integrates with Camel.

|http://www.jboss.org/jbossesb[JBoss ESB] |JBoss ESB integrates with
Camel.

|http://code.google.com/p/simple-dm/[simple-dm] |Simple Dynamic Module
System for Maven integrates with Camel.

|http://wiki.jonas.ow2.org/xwiki/bin/view/Main/WebHome[JOnAS Application
Server] |JOnAS Application Server integrates with Camel.

|http://code.google.com/p/active-bam/[Active BAM] |Web Console Business
Activity Monitoring for ServiceMix, Camel and ActiveMQ.

|http://incubator.apache.org/hise/[Apache Hise] |Apache Hise (Open
Source Implementation of WS-Human-Task Specification) integrates with
Camel.

|http://www.catify.com/[Catify] |Catify is build on top of proven
software stack like Spring, Apache ActiveMQ, Apache Camel, Apache Felix
and MongoDB.

|http://touk.pl/toukeu/rw/pages/index.en.do[TouK] |We are using Apache
ServiceMix (both 3.x and 4.x) with http://camel.apache.org/[Apache
Camel], http://ode.apache.org/[Apache ODE] and
http://incubator.apache.org/hise/[Apache HISE] as a middleware
integration platform, with the biggest deployment for
http://www.playmobile.pl/[Play], mobile telco operator in Poland

|http://web.progress.com/en/sonic/sonic-esb.html[Progress Sonic ESB]
|Progress Sonic ESB uses Camel internally to mediate Web Service
messages (leveraging CXF stack) and Sonic ESB messages

|https://github.com/krasserm/scalaz-camel[scalaz-camel] |A
Scala(z)-based DSL for Apache Camel

|https://github.com/obergner/camelpe[camel-camelpe] |A CDI Portable
Extension for Apache Camel

|http://www.kuali.org/ole[Kuali Ole] |Kuali OLE uses Apache Camel in
their open source administrative software

|http://code.google.com/p/caerusone/[CaerusOne] |CaerusOne is advanced
application integration framework, sdk, server application server. It
uses apache camel routing engine as part of core process engine.

|http://www.jboss.org/switchyard[JBoss SwitchYard] |SwitchYard is a
lightweight service delivery framework for SOA and its integrated with
Camel out of the box.

|https://github.com/osinka/camel-scala-extra[camel-scala-extra] |Extra
Apache Camel methods for Scala

|https://github.com/marcuspocus/play-camel[camel-play] |A EIP +
Messaging module for the Play! Framework

|http://activiti.org/[Activiti]
|http://bpmn20inaction.blogspot.com/2011/05/supersize-activiti-with-mule-esb-and.html[Activiti
BPM] has direct Apache Camel integration.

|http://easyforms-camel.forge.onehippo.org/[EasyForms Camel Support]
|The EasyForms Camel Support Components provides extended HST EasyForms
Components which can invoke Apache Camel Routes.

|http://code.google.com/p/rmannibucau/wiki/CamelDiagramGenerator[CamelDiagramGenerator]
|A maven plugin to generate camel diagram from routes.

|http://sksamuel.github.com/camelwatch/[CamelWatch] |A web app for
monitoring Camel applications.

|http://zeroturnaround.com/software/jrebel[JRebel] |JRebel now supports
http://zeroturnaround.com/jrebel/jrebel-5-1-2-released-apache-camel-now-supported/[reloading
Camel routes] without any application server restarts.

|https://github.com/AlanFoster/Camelry[Camelry] |This IntelliJ plugin is
designed to improve the development experience when working with Apache
Blueprint, Apache karaf and Apache Camel.

|http://giacomolm.github.io/Jel/[Jel] |Javascript graphical Editor that
generates DSL. This is a web based tooling that offers a GUI for
defining and editing Apache Camel routes using the XML DSL.

|http://crossing-tech.github.io/babel/[Babel] |Babel is a Domain
Specific Language for Integration made in Scala. It provides elegant API
in order to use well-known integration frameworks. Babel provides an API
on top of Apache Camel which may be used in Scala.

|https://github.com/wildflyext/wildfly-camel[Wildfly Camel] |The
WildFly-Camel Subsystem allows you to add Camel Routes as part of the
WildFly configuration. Routes can be deployed as part of JavaEE
applications. JavaEE components can access the Camel Core API and
various Camel Component APIs. Your Enterprise Integration Solution can
be architected as a combination of JavaEE and Camel functionality.

|https://github.com/hekonsek/camel-m2m-gateway[Camel M2M gateway] |This
project summarizes the R&D activities around the process of adopting the
Apache Camel as the Internet Of Things M2M gateway. By the gateway we
understand a field device with the moderate processing power (such as
Raspberry Pi or BeagleBone Black) responsible for the routing of the
messages between the IoT edge devices (sensors, drones, cars, etc) and
the data center.

|https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k_ckJ7QgLW0#t=480[Netflix] |Netflix
uses Apache Camel as part of the cloud payment system.

|http://forge.jboss.org/[JBoss Forge] |The
http://forge.jboss.org/addon/io.fabric8.forge:camel[Camel addon] from
http://fabric8.io/[fabric8] allows to setup and manage your Apache Camel
maven projects from a CLI, Eclipse, IDEA, and NetBeans. With this addon
from the IDEs you can use a wizard driven UI to add new Camel
components, add/edit existing endpoints in a UI that allows to edit each
options individually in a more type safe manner. You can also setup your
Maven project for Docker and Kubernetes platforms.

|http://islandora.ca/[Islandora] |Islandora** **is an open-source
software framework designed to help institutions and organizations and
their audiences collaboratively manage, and discover digital assets
using a best-practices framework.  They use Camel and JMS queues in the
platform.

|SAP HANA |The
https://blogs.saphana.com/2016/02/01/hana-smart-data-integration-simplifies-connecting-consuming-facebook-data-hana-apache-camel-adapter[HANA
platform from SAP] uses Apache Camel.

|https://github.com/hammock-project/hammock[Hammock] |Hammock is a CDI
based microservices framework. Hammock integrates with Camel.

|https://github.com/krasserm/streamz[Streamz] |A combinator library for
integrating Functional Streams for Scala (FS2), Akka Streams and Apache
Camel

|http://www.openhub.cz/[OpenHub] |OpenHub is an integration platform
that is built on top of Apache Camel.

|https://abi-laboratory.pro/java/tracker/timeline/camel-core/[API
Tracker 4j of camel-core] |The review of API changes for the Camel Core
library since Camel 2.16 which is updated several times per week.
|=======================================================================

==== User Groups

[width="100%",cols="50%,50%",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|User Groups |Description
|https://groups.google.com/group/camel-user-group-denmark[Apache Camel
User Group Denmark] |A danish user group for Apache Camel.

|http://groups.google.com/group/apache-camel-user-group-tunisia[Apache
Camel User Group Tunisia] |A tunisian user group for Apache Camel.

|http://www.linkedin.com/groups?gid=2447439&trk=hb_side_g[Linkedin
Apache Camel Group] |The Apache Camel group in linkedin.

|https://plus.google.com/communities/106271384875356488225[Google+
Apache Camel Group] |The Apache Camel group in google+

|https://jcug-oss.github.io/[Apache Camel User Group Japan] |A Japanese
user group for Apache Camel.
|=======================================================================

==== External Camel Components

[width="100%",cols="50%,50%",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|External Camel Components |Description
|https://github.com/gerco/camel-apama[camel-apama] |A Camel component
for http://web.progress.com/en/apama/index.html[Progress Apama]

|https://github.com/bbonnin/camel-arangodb[camel-arangdodb] |Camel
component for accessing ArangoDB

|http://github.com/osinka/camel-beanstalk[camel-beanstalk] |Apache Camel
component for beanstalk.

|http://github.com/ticktock/camel-cassandra[camel-cassandra] |A Camel
Cassandra component.

|https://github.com/oscerd/camel-cassandra[camel-cassandra]http://github.com/ticktock/camel-cassandra[]
|Another Camel Cassandra component based on Cassandra Datastax Java
Driver.

|https://github.com/jdavisonc/camel-gdrive[camel-gdrive] |A Camel
component for Google Drive.

|https://github.com/cdollins/camel-grizzly[camel-grizzly] |A component
that works with the Glassfish Grizzly networking library

|https://code.google.com/p/isotypes/[camel-isotypes] |A Camel component
for ISO8583 isotypes.

|http://accord.ow2.org/odetteftp/camel.html[camel-oftp2]
|http://www.neociclo.com/[Neociclo] provides an
http://accord.ow2.org/odetteftp/protocol.html[OFTP2] component for
Apache Camel.

|https://bitbucket.org/arkadi/camel-sipe[camel-sipe] |A Camel component
to communicate with Microsoft Office Communicator and Lync Servers.

|https://github.com/Redpill-Linpro/camel-smb[Camel SMB] |This project is
a Samba Camel component build on top of http://jcifs.samba.org[JCIFS].

|https://github.com/wheijke/camel-tika[camel-tika] |Camel data format
for http://tika.apache.org/[Apache Tika]

|https://github.com/soluvas/tumblej[camel-tumblr] |A Camel component to
post to Tumblr.

|http://code.google.com/p/oracle-coherence-camel-component/[Oracle
Coherence Camel Component] |A Camel component for integrating with
Oracle Coherence

|https://github.com/osinka/camel-scala-extra[camel-scala-extra] |Extra
Apache Camel methods for Scala

|https://github.com/Bluelock/camel-spring-amqp[camel-spring-amqp] |A
Camel component to integrate with Spring AMQP to communicate with for
example RabbitMQ.

|https://github.com/osinka/camel-kamon[camel-kamon] |Kamon metrics and
traces for Apache Camel routes, processors

|https://github.com/donovanmuller/camel-spring-cloud-stream[camel-spring-cloud-stream]
|A component to integrate with Spring Cloud Stream
|=======================================================================

 
