components/camel-test/camel-test-spring-junit5/src/main/docs/test-spring-junit5.adoc, before:

= Test Spring JUnit5 Component
:doctitle: Test Spring JUnit5
:shortname: test-spring-junit5
:artifactid: camel-test-spring-junit5
:description: Camel unit testing with Spring and JUnit 5
:since: 3.0
:supportlevel: Stable
:tabs-sync-option:

*Since Camel {since}*

The `camel-test-spring-junit5` module is used for testing Camel with Spring;
both the classic Spring XML files or Spring Boot.

== Testing Spring Boot

The recommended approach is to annotate the test class with `org.apache.camel.test.spring.junit5.CamelSpringBootTest`.
This replaces the Junit4 `@RunWith` annotation using `SpringRunner.class` or `CamelSpringBootRunner.class`.
To enable autoconfiguration of the Camel context and other Spring boot auto-configurable components,
use the annotation `org.springframework.boot.autoconfigure.EnableAutoConfiguration`.
The Spring test context may be specified in one of three ways:

* a nested class annotated with `org.springframework.context.annotation.Configuration`. This may define one or more Beans such as a `RouteBuilder`.
* a `SpringBootTest` annotation with a classes parameter to specify the configuration class or classes. The `@SpringBootTest` annotation may also specify custom properties as shown in the example below.
* a class annotated with `SpringBootConfiguration` accessible in the package of the test class or a parent package.



[source,java]
----
package com.foo;

@CamelSpringBootTest
@EnableAutoConfiguration
@SpringBootTest(
    properties = { "camel.springboot.name=customName" }
)
class CamelSpringBootSimpleTest {

    @Autowired
    ProducerTemplate producerTemplate;
    
    @EndpointInject("mock:test")
    MockEndpoint mockEndpoint;
    
    //Spring context fixtures
    @Configuration
    static class TestConfig {

        @Bean
        RoutesBuilder route() {
            return new RouteBuilder() {
                @Override
                public void configure() throws Exception {
                    from("direct:test").to("mock:test");
                }
            };
        }
    }

    @Test
    public void shouldAutowireProducerTemplate() {
        assertNotNull(producerTemplate);
    }
    
    @Test
    public void shouldSetCustomName() {
        assertEquals("customName", producerTemplate.getCamelContext().getName());
    }
    
    @Test
    public void shouldInjectEndpoint() throws InterruptedException {
        mockEndpoint.setExpectedMessageCount(1);
        producerTemplate.sendBody("direct:test", "msg");
        mockEndpoint.assertIsSatisfied();
    }
}
----

== Testing classic Spring XML

There are multiple approaches to test Camel Spring 5.x based routes with JUnit 5.
An approach is to extend `org.apache.camel.test.spring.junit5.CamelSpringTestSupport`, for instance:

[source,java]
----
public class SimpleMockTest extends CamelSpringTestSupport {

    @EndpointInject("mock:result")
    protected MockEndpoint resultEndpoint;

    @Produce("direct:start")
    protected ProducerTemplate template;

    @Override
    protected AbstractApplicationContext createApplicationContext() {
        // loads a Spring XML file
        return new ClassPathXmlApplicationContext("org/apache/camel/test/patterns/SimpleMockTest.xml");
    }

    @Test
    public void testMock() throws Exception {
        String expectedBody = "Hello World";
        resultEndpoint.expectedBodiesReceived(expectedBody);
        template.sendBodyAndHeader(expectedBody, "foo", "bar");
        resultEndpoint.assertIsSatisfied();
    }
}
----

The example above is loading a classic Spring XML file (has `<beans>` as root tag).

This approach provides feature parity with `org.apache.camel.test.junit5.CamelTestSupport`
from xref:components:others:test-junit5.adoc[camel-test-junit5] but does not support Spring annotations
on the test class such as `@Autowired`, `@DirtiesContext`, and `@ContextConfiguration`.

Instead of instantiating the `CamelContext` and routes programmatically,
this class relies on a Spring context to wire the needed components together.
If your test extends this class, you must provide the Spring context by implementing the following method:

[source,java]
----
protected abstract AbstractApplicationContext createApplicationContext();
----

=== Using the `@CamelSpringTest` annotation

A better and recommended approach involves the usage of the
`org.apache.camel.test.spring.junit5.CamelSpringTest` annotation, as shown:

[source,java]
----
package com.foo;

@CamelSpringTest
@ContextConfiguration
@DirtiesContext(classMode = ClassMode.AFTER_EACH_TEST_METHOD)
public class CamelSpringPlainTest {

    @Autowired
    protected CamelContext camelContext;

    @EndpointInject("mock:a")
    protected MockEndpoint mockA;

    @EndpointInject("mock:b")
    protected MockEndpoint mockB;

    @Produce("direct:start")
    protected ProducerTemplate start;

    @Test
    public void testPositive() throws Exception {
        assertEquals(ServiceStatus.Started, camelContext.getStatus());

        mockA.expectedBodiesReceived("David");
        mockB.expectedBodiesReceived("Hello David");

        start.sendBody("David");

        MockEndpoint.assertIsSatisfied(camelContext);
    }
}
----

The above test will by default load a Spring XML file using the naming pattern _className_-context.xml, which means
the example above loads the file `com/foo/CamelSpringPlainTest-context.xml`.

This XML file is Spring XML file as shown:

[source,xml]
----
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<beans xmlns="http://www.springframework.org/schema/beans"
	xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
	xsi:schemaLocation="
		http://camel.apache.org/schema/spring http://camel.apache.org/schema/spring/camel-spring.xsd
		http://www.springframework.org/schema/beans http://www.springframework.org/schema/beans/spring-beans.xsd ">

	<camelContext id="camelContext" xmlns="http://camel.apache.org/schema/spring">
		<route>
			<from uri="direct:start"/>
			<to uri="mock:a"/>
			<transform>
				<simple>Hello ${body}</simple>
			</transform>
			<to uri="mock:b"/>
		</route>
	</camelContext>
</beans>
----

This approach supports both Camel and Spring annotations, such as `@Autowired`, `@DirtiesContext`, and `@ContextConfiguration`.
However, it does NOT have feature parity with `org.apache.camel.test.junit5.CamelTestSupport`.

== Camel test annotations

The following annotations can be used with `camel-spring-junit5` unit testing.

[width="100%",cols="1m,4",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Annotation |Description
| `@CamelSpringBootTest` | Used for testing Camel with Spring Boot
| `@CamelSpringTest` | Used for testing Camel with classic Spring XML (not Spring Boot)
| `@DisableJmx` | Used for disabling JMX
| `@EnableRouteCoverage` | Enables dumping route coverage statistics. The route coverage status is written as xml files in the `target/camel-route-coverage` directory after the test has finished. See more information at xref:manual::camel-report-maven-plugin.adoc[Camel Maven Report Plugin].
| `@ExcludeRoutes` | Indicates if certain route builder classes should be excluded from package scan discovery
| `@MockEndpoints` | Auto-mocking of endpoints whose URIs match the provided filter. For more information, see xref:manual::advice-with.adoc[Advice With].
| `@MockEndpointsAndSkip` | Auto-mocking of endpoints whose URIs match the provided filter with the added provision that the endpoints are also skipped. For more information, see xref:manual::advice-with.adoc[Advice With].
| `@ProvidesBreakpoint` | Indicates that the annotated method returns a `Breakpoint` for use in the test. Useful for intercepting traffic to all endpoints or simply for setting a break point in an IDE for debugging. The method must be `public static`, take no arguments, and return `Breakpoint`.
| `@ShutdownTimeout` | Timeout to use for xref:manual::graceful-shutdown.adoc[shutdown]. The default is 10 seconds.
| `@UseAdviceWith` | To enable testing with xref:manual::advice-with.adoc[Advice With].
| `@UseOverridePropertiesWithPropertiesComponent` | To use custom `Properties` with the xref:ROOT:properties-component.adoc[Properties] component. The annotated method must be `public` and return `Properties`.
|=======================================================================



== Migrating Camel Spring Tests from JUnit 4 to JUnit 5

Find below some hints to help in migrating Camel Spring tests from JUnit 4 to JUnit 5.

Projects using `camel-test-spring` would need to use `camel-test-spring-junit5`. For instance, maven users would update their pom.xml file as below:

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>org.apache.camel</groupId>
  <artifactId>camel-test-spring-junit5</artifactId>
  <scope>test</scope>
</dependency>
----

TIP: It's possible to run JUnit 4 & JUnit 5 based Camel Spring tests side by side including the following dependencies `camel-test-spring`,
`camel-test-spring-junit5` and `junit-vintage-engine`. This configuration allows migrating Camel tests one by one.

=== Migration steps

* Migration steps from xref:components:others:test-junit5.adoc[camel-test-junit5] should have been applied first
* Imports of `org.apache.camel.test.spring.\*` should be replaced with `org.apache.camel.test.spring.junit5.*`
* Usage of `@RunWith(CamelSpringRunner.class)` should be replaced with `@CamelSpringTest`
* Usage of `@BootstrapWith(CamelTestContextBootstrapper.class)` should be replaced with `@CamelSpringTest`
* Usage of `@RunWith(CamelSpringBootRunner.class)` should be replaced with `@CamelSpringBootTest`

Commit message:

camel-test - Add option to dump routes (#16674)
* CAMEL-21274: camel-test - Add option to dump routes

components/camel-test/camel-test-spring-junit5/src/main/docs/test-spring-junit5.adoc, after:

= Test Spring JUnit5 Component
:doctitle: Test Spring JUnit5
:shortname: test-spring-junit5
:artifactid: camel-test-spring-junit5
:description: Camel unit testing with Spring and JUnit 5
:since: 3.0
:supportlevel: Stable
:tabs-sync-option:

*Since Camel {since}*

The `camel-test-spring-junit5` module is used for testing Camel with Spring;
both the classic Spring XML files or Spring Boot.

== Testing Spring Boot

The recommended approach is to annotate the test class with `org.apache.camel.test.spring.junit5.CamelSpringBootTest`.
This replaces the Junit4 `@RunWith` annotation using `SpringBootTest`.

To enable autoconfiguration of the Camel context and other Spring boot auto-configurable components,
use the annotation `org.springframework.boot.autoconfigure.EnableAutoConfiguration`.
The Spring test context may be specified in one of three ways:

* a nested class annotated with `org.springframework.context.annotation.Configuration`. This may define one or more Beans such as a `RouteBuilder`.
* a `SpringBootTest` annotation with a classes parameter to specify the configuration class or classes. The `@SpringBootTest` annotation may also specify custom properties as shown in the example below.
* a class annotated with `SpringBootConfiguration` accessible in the package of the test class or a parent package.


[source,java]
----
package com.foo;

@CamelSpringBootTest
@EnableAutoConfiguration
@SpringBootTest(
    properties = { "camel.springboot.name=customName" }
)
class CamelSpringBootSimpleTest {

    @Autowired
    ProducerTemplate producerTemplate;
    
    @EndpointInject("mock:test")
    MockEndpoint mockEndpoint;
    
    //Spring context fixtures
    @Configuration
    static class TestConfig {

        @Bean
        RoutesBuilder route() {
            return new RouteBuilder() {
                @Override
                public void configure() throws Exception {
                    from("direct:test").to("mock:test");
                }
            };
        }
    }

    @Test
    public void shouldAutowireProducerTemplate() {
        assertNotNull(producerTemplate);
    }
    
    @Test
    public void shouldSetCustomName() {
        assertEquals("customName", producerTemplate.getCamelContext().getName());
    }
    
    @Test
    public void shouldInjectEndpoint() throws InterruptedException {
        mockEndpoint.setExpectedMessageCount(1);
        producerTemplate.sendBody("direct:test", "msg");
        mockEndpoint.assertIsSatisfied();
    }
}
----

== Testing classic Spring XML

There are multiple approaches to test Camel Spring 5.x based routes with JUnit 5.
An approach is to extend `org.apache.camel.test.spring.junit5.CamelSpringTestSupport`, for instance:

[source,java]
----
public class SimpleMockTest extends CamelSpringTestSupport {

    @EndpointInject("mock:result")
    protected MockEndpoint resultEndpoint;

    @Produce("direct:start")
    protected ProducerTemplate template;

    @Override
    protected AbstractApplicationContext createApplicationContext() {
        // loads a Spring XML file
        return new ClassPathXmlApplicationContext("org/apache/camel/test/patterns/SimpleMockTest.xml");
    }

    @Test
    public void testMock() throws Exception {
        String expectedBody = "Hello World";
        resultEndpoint.expectedBodiesReceived(expectedBody);
        template.sendBodyAndHeader(expectedBody, "foo", "bar");
        resultEndpoint.assertIsSatisfied();
    }
}
----

The example above is loading a classic Spring XML file (has `<beans>` as root tag).

This approach provides feature parity with `org.apache.camel.test.junit5.CamelTestSupport`
from xref:components:others:test-junit5.adoc[camel-test-junit5] but does not support Spring annotations
on the test class such as `@Autowired`, `@DirtiesContext`, and `@ContextConfiguration`.

Instead of instantiating the `CamelContext` and routes programmatically,
this class relies on a Spring context to wire the needed components together.
If your test extends this class, you must provide the Spring context by implementing the following method:

[source,java]
----
protected abstract AbstractApplicationContext createApplicationContext();
----

=== Using the `@CamelSpringTest` annotation

A better and recommended approach involves the usage of the
`org.apache.camel.test.spring.junit5.CamelSpringTest` annotation, as shown:

[source,java]
----
package com.foo;

@CamelSpringTest
@ContextConfiguration
@DirtiesContext(classMode = ClassMode.AFTER_EACH_TEST_METHOD)
public class CamelSpringPlainTest {

    @Autowired
    protected CamelContext camelContext;

    @EndpointInject("mock:a")
    protected MockEndpoint mockA;

    @EndpointInject("mock:b")
    protected MockEndpoint mockB;

    @Produce("direct:start")
    protected ProducerTemplate start;

    @Test
    public void testPositive() throws Exception {
        assertEquals(ServiceStatus.Started, camelContext.getStatus());

        mockA.expectedBodiesReceived("David");
        mockB.expectedBodiesReceived("Hello David");

        start.sendBody("David");

        MockEndpoint.assertIsSatisfied(camelContext);
    }
}
----

The above test will by default load a Spring XML file using the naming pattern _className_-context.xml, which means
the example above loads the file `com/foo/CamelSpringPlainTest-context.xml`.

This XML file is Spring XML file as shown:

[source,xml]
----
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<beans xmlns="http://www.springframework.org/schema/beans"
	xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
	xsi:schemaLocation="
		http://camel.apache.org/schema/spring http://camel.apache.org/schema/spring/camel-spring.xsd
		http://www.springframework.org/schema/beans http://www.springframework.org/schema/beans/spring-beans.xsd ">

	<camelContext id="camelContext" xmlns="http://camel.apache.org/schema/spring">
		<route>
			<from uri="direct:start"/>
			<to uri="mock:a"/>
			<transform>
				<simple>Hello ${body}</simple>
			</transform>
			<to uri="mock:b"/>
		</route>
	</camelContext>
</beans>
----

This approach supports both Camel and Spring annotations, such as `@Autowired`, `@DirtiesContext`, and `@ContextConfiguration`.
However, it does NOT have feature parity with `org.apache.camel.test.junit5.CamelTestSupport`.

== Camel test annotations

The following annotations can be used with `camel-spring-junit5` unit testing.

[width="100%",cols="1m,4",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Annotation |Description
| `@CamelSpringBootTest` | Used for testing Camel with Spring Boot
| `@CamelSpringTest` | Used for testing Camel with classic Spring XML (not Spring Boot)
| `@DisableJmx` | Used for disabling JMX
| `@EnableRouteCoverage` | Enables dumping route coverage statistics. The route coverage status is written as xml files in the `target/camel-route-coverage` directory after the test has finished. See more information at xref:manual::camel-report-maven-plugin.adoc[Camel Maven Report Plugin].
| `@EnableRouteDump` | Enables dumping route. The route dump is written as xml or yaml files in the `target/camel-route-dump` directory after the test has finished.
| `@ExcludeRoutes` | Indicates if certain route builder classes should be excluded from package scan discovery
| `@MockEndpoints` | Auto-mocking of endpoints whose URIs match the provided filter. For more information, see xref:manual::advice-with.adoc[Advice With].
| `@MockEndpointsAndSkip` | Auto-mocking of endpoints whose URIs match the provided filter with the added provision that the endpoints are also skipped. For more information, see xref:manual::advice-with.adoc[Advice With].
| `@ProvidesBreakpoint` | Indicates that the annotated method returns a `Breakpoint` for use in the test. Useful for intercepting traffic to all endpoints or simply for setting a break point in an IDE for debugging. The method must be `public static`, take no arguments, and return `Breakpoint`.
| `@ShutdownTimeout` | Timeout to use for xref:manual::graceful-shutdown.adoc[shutdown]. The default is 10 seconds.
| `@UseAdviceWith` | To enable testing with xref:manual::advice-with.adoc[Advice With].
| `@UseOverridePropertiesWithPropertiesComponent` | To use custom `Properties` with the xref:ROOT:properties-component.adoc[Properties] component. The annotated method must be `public` and return `Properties`.
|=======================================================================



== Migrating Camel Spring Tests from JUnit 4 to JUnit 5

Find below some hints to help in migrating Camel Spring tests from JUnit 4 to JUnit 5.

Projects using `camel-test-spring` would need to use `camel-test-spring-junit5`. For instance, maven users would update their pom.xml file as below:

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>org.apache.camel</groupId>
  <artifactId>camel-test-spring-junit5</artifactId>
  <scope>test</scope>
</dependency>
----

TIP: It's possible to run JUnit 4 & JUnit 5 based Camel Spring tests side by side including the following dependencies `camel-test-spring`,
`camel-test-spring-junit5` and `junit-vintage-engine`. This configuration allows migrating Camel tests one by one.

=== Migration steps

* Migration steps from xref:components:others:test-junit5.adoc[camel-test-junit5] should have been applied first
* Imports of `org.apache.camel.test.spring.\*` should be replaced with `org.apache.camel.test.spring.junit5.*`
* Usage of `@RunWith(CamelSpringRunner.class)` should be replaced with `@CamelSpringTest`
* Usage of `@BootstrapWith(CamelTestContextBootstrapper.class)` should be replaced with `@CamelSpringTest`
* Usage of `@RunWith(CamelSpringBootRunner.class)` should be replaced with `@CamelSpringBootTest`
