[[PipesandFilters-PipesandFilters]]
Pipes and Filters
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Camel supports the
http://www.enterpriseintegrationpatterns.com/PipesAndFilters.html[Pipes
and Filters] from the link:enterprise-integration-patterns.html[EIP
patterns] in various ways.

image:http://www.enterpriseintegrationpatterns.com/img/PipesAndFilters.gif[image]

With Camel you can split your processing across multiple independent
link:endpoint.html[Endpoint] instances which can then be chained
together.

[[PipesandFilters-UsingRoutingLogic]]
Using Routing Logic
+++++++++++++++++++

You can create pipelines of logic using multiple
link:endpoint.html[Endpoint] or link:message-translator.html[Message
Translator] instances as follows

Though pipeline is the default mode of operation when you specify
multiple outputs in Camel. The opposite to pipeline is multicast; which
fires the same message into each of its outputs. (See the example
below).

In Spring XML you can use the <pipeline/> element

[source,java]
------------------------------------
<route>
  <from uri="activemq:SomeQueue"/>
  <pipeline>
    <bean ref="foo"/>
    <bean ref="bar"/>
    <to uri="activemq:OutputQueue"/>
  </pipeline>
</route>
------------------------------------

In the above the pipeline element is actually unnecessary, you could use
this...

[source,java]
----------------------------------
<route>
  <from uri="activemq:SomeQueue"/>
  <bean ref="foo"/>
  <bean ref="bar"/>
  <to uri="activemq:OutputQueue"/>
</route>
----------------------------------

Its just a bit more explicit. However if you wish to use <multicast/> to
avoid a pipeline - to send the same message into multiple pipelines -
then the <pipeline/> element comes into its own.

[source,java]
--------------------------------------
<route>
  <from uri="activemq:SomeQueue"/>
  <multicast>
    <pipeline>
      <bean ref="something"/>
      <to uri="log:Something"/>
    </pipeline>
    <pipeline>
      <bean ref="foo"/>
      <bean ref="bar"/>
      <to uri="activemq:OutputQueue"/>
    </pipeline>
  </multicast>
</route>
--------------------------------------

In the above example we are routing from a single
link:endpoint.html[Endpoint] to a list of different endpoints specified
using link:uris.html[URIs]. If you find the above a bit confusing, try
reading about the link:architecture.html[Architecture] or try the
link:examples.html[Examples]

[[PipesandFilters-UsingThisPattern]]
Using This Pattern
++++++++++++++++++

If you would like to use this EIP Pattern then please read the
link:getting-started.html[Getting Started], you may also find the
link:architecture.html[Architecture] useful particularly the description
of link:endpoint.html[Endpoint] and link:uris.html[URIs]. Then you could
try out some of the link:examples.html[Examples] first before trying
this pattern out.
