components/camel-opentelemetry/src/main/docs/opentelemetry.adoc, before:

= OpenTelemetry Component
:doctitle: OpenTelemetry
:shortname: opentelemetry
:artifactid: camel-opentelemetry
:description: Distributed tracing using OpenTelemetry
:since: 3.5
:supportlevel: Stable
:tabs-sync-option:
//Manually maintained attributes
:camel-spring-boot-name: opentelemetry

*Since Camel {since}*

The OpenTelemetry component is used for tracing and timing incoming and
outgoing Camel messages using https://opentelemetry.io/[OpenTelemetry].

Events (spans) are captured for incoming and outgoing messages being sent
to/from Camel.

== Configuration

The configuration properties for the OpenTelemetry tracer are:

[width="100%",cols="10%,10%,80%",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Option |Default |Description
|`instrumentationName`| camel | A name uniquely identifying the instrumentation scope, such as the instrumentation library, package, or fully qualified class name. Must not be null.
|`excludePatterns` |  | Sets exclude pattern(s) that will disable tracing for Camel
messages that matches the pattern. The content is a Set<String> where the key is a pattern. The pattern
uses the rules from Intercept.
|`encoding` | `false` | Sets whether the header keys need to be encoded (connector specific) or not. The value is a boolean.
Dashes are required for instances to be encoded for JMS property keys.
|`traceProcessors` | `false` | Setting this to true will create new OpenTelemetry Spans for each Camel Processors.
Use the excludePattern property to filter out Processors
|=======================================================================


== Using Camel OpenTelemetry

Include the `camel-opentelemetry` component in your POM, along with any specific dependencies associated with the
chosen OpenTelemetry compliant Tracer.

To explicitly configure OpenTelemetry support, instantiate the `OpenTelemetryTracer` and initialize the camel
context. You can optionally specify a `Tracer`, or alternatively it can be implicitly discovered using the
`Registry`

[source,java]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
OpenTelemetryTracer otelTracer = new OpenTelemetryTracer();
// By default, it uses the DefaultTracer, but you can override it with a specific OpenTelemetry Tracer implementation.
otelTracer.setTracer(...);
// And then initialize the context
otelTracer.init(camelContext);
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

NOTE: You would still need OpenTelemetry to instrument your code, which can be done via a <<OpenTelemetry-JavaAgent,Java agent>>.

=== Using with standalone Camel

If you use `camel-main` as standalone Camel, then you can enable and use OpenTelemetry without Java code.

Add `camel-opentelemetry` component in your POM, and configure in `application.properties`:

[source,properties]
----
camel.opentelemetry.enabled = true
# you can configure the other options
# camel.opentelemetry.instrumentationName = myApp
----

NOTE: You would still need OpenTelemetry to instrument your code, which can be done via a <<OpenTelemetry-JavaAgent,Java agent>>.

== Spring Boot

If you are using Spring Boot, then you can add
the `camel-opentelemetry-starter` dependency, and turn on OpenTelemetry by annotating
the main class with `@CamelOpenTelemetry`.

The `OpenTelemetryTracer` will be implicitly obtained from the camel context's `Registry`, unless
a `OpenTelemetryTracer` bean has been defined by the application.

[[OpenTelemetry-JavaAgent]]
== Java Agent

Download the https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation/releases/[latest version].

This package includes the instrumentation agent as well as instrumentation for all supported libraries and all available data exporters.
The package provides a completely automatic, out-of-the-box experience.

Enable the instrumentation agent using the `-javaagent` flag to the JVM.

[source,bash]
----
java -javaagent:path/to/opentelemetry-javaagent.jar \
     -jar myapp.jar
----

By default, the OpenTelemetry Java agent uses https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java/tree/main/exporters/otlp[OTLP exporter] configured to send data to https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/receiver/otlpreceiver/README.md[OpenTelemetry collector] at `http://localhost:4318`.

Configuration parameters are passed as Java system properties (`-D` flags) or as environment variables. See https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation/blob/main/docs/agent-features.md[the configuration documentation] for the full list of configuration items. For example:

[source,bash]
----
java -javaagent:path/to/opentelemetry-javaagent.jar \
     -Dotel.service.name=your-service-name \
     -Dotel.traces.exporter=otlp \
     -jar myapp.jar
----

include::spring-boot:partial$starter.adoc[]

== MDC Logging

When MDC Logging is enabled for the active Camel context the Trace ID and Span ID will be added and removed from the MDC for each route, the keys are `trace_id` and `span_id`, respectively.

Commit message:

chore(doc): spring boot configuration required (#16372)
Closes CAMEL-21460

components/camel-opentelemetry/src/main/docs/opentelemetry.adoc, after:

= OpenTelemetry Component
:doctitle: OpenTelemetry
:shortname: opentelemetry
:artifactid: camel-opentelemetry
:description: Distributed tracing using OpenTelemetry
:since: 3.5
:supportlevel: Stable
:tabs-sync-option:
//Manually maintained attributes
:camel-spring-boot-name: opentelemetry

*Since Camel {since}*

The OpenTelemetry component is used for tracing and timing incoming and
outgoing Camel messages using https://opentelemetry.io/[OpenTelemetry].

Events (spans) are captured for incoming and outgoing messages being sent
to/from Camel.

== Configuration

The configuration properties for the OpenTelemetry tracer are:

[width="100%",cols="10%,10%,80%",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Option |Default |Description
|`instrumentationName`| camel | A name uniquely identifying the instrumentation scope, such as the instrumentation library, package, or fully qualified class name. Must not be null.
|`excludePatterns` |  | Sets exclude pattern(s) that will disable tracing for Camel
messages that matches the pattern. The content is a Set<String> where the key is a pattern. The pattern
uses the rules from Intercept.
|`encoding` | `false` | Sets whether the header keys need to be encoded (connector specific) or not. The value is a boolean.
Dashes are required for instances to be encoded for JMS property keys.
|`traceProcessors` | `false` | Setting this to true will create new OpenTelemetry Spans for each Camel Processors.
Use the excludePattern property to filter out Processors
|=======================================================================


== Using Camel OpenTelemetry

Include the `camel-opentelemetry` component in your POM, along with any specific dependencies associated with the
chosen OpenTelemetry compliant Tracer.

To explicitly configure OpenTelemetry support, instantiate the `OpenTelemetryTracer` and initialize the camel
context. You can optionally specify a `Tracer`, or alternatively it can be implicitly discovered using the
`Registry`

[source,java]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
OpenTelemetryTracer otelTracer = new OpenTelemetryTracer();
// By default, it uses the DefaultTracer, but you can override it with a specific OpenTelemetry Tracer implementation.
otelTracer.setTracer(...);
// And then initialize the context
otelTracer.init(camelContext);
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

NOTE: You would still need OpenTelemetry to instrument your code, which can be done via a <<OpenTelemetry-JavaAgent,Java agent>>.

=== Using with standalone Camel

If you use `camel-main` as standalone Camel, then you can enable and use OpenTelemetry without Java code.

Add `camel-opentelemetry` component in your POM, and configure in `application.properties`:

[source,properties]
----
camel.opentelemetry.enabled = true
# you can configure the other options
# camel.opentelemetry.instrumentationName = myApp
----

NOTE: You would still need OpenTelemetry to instrument your code, which can be done via a <<OpenTelemetry-JavaAgent,Java agent>>.

== Spring Boot

If you are using Spring Boot, then you can add
the `camel-opentelemetry-starter` dependency, and turn on OpenTelemetry by annotating
the main class with `@CamelOpenTelemetry`.

The `OpenTelemetryTracer` will be implicitly obtained from the camel context's `Registry`, unless
a `OpenTelemetryTracer` bean has been defined by the application.

[[OpenTelemetry-JavaAgent]]
== Java Agent

Download the https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation/releases/[latest version].

This package includes the instrumentation agent as well as instrumentation for all supported libraries and all available data exporters.
The package provides a completely automatic, out-of-the-box experience.

Enable the instrumentation agent using the `-javaagent` flag to the JVM.

[source,bash]
----
java -javaagent:path/to/opentelemetry-javaagent.jar \
     -jar myapp.jar
----

By default, the OpenTelemetry Java agent uses https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java/tree/main/exporters/otlp[OTLP exporter] configured to send data to https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/receiver/otlpreceiver/README.md[OpenTelemetry collector] at `http://localhost:4318`.

Configuration parameters are passed as Java system properties (`-D` flags) or as environment variables. See https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation/blob/main/docs/agent-features.md[the configuration documentation] for the full list of configuration items. For example:

[source,bash]
----
java -javaagent:path/to/opentelemetry-javaagent.jar \
     -Dotel.service.name=your-service-name \
     -Dotel.traces.exporter=otlp \
     -jar myapp.jar
----

include::spring-boot:partial$starter.adoc[]

WARNING: the dependencies used by Camel core are not in sync with the one provided by Spring Boot BOM. If you're using this component be mindful of the https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/CAMEL-21460[4.8.x Opentelemetry configuration] required.

== MDC Logging

When MDC Logging is enabled for the active Camel context the Trace ID and Span ID will be added and removed from the MDC for each route, the keys are `trace_id` and `span_id`, respectively.
