components/camel-ibm-secrets-manager/src/main/docs/ibm-secrets-manager-component.adoc, before:

= IBM Secrets Manager Component
:doctitle: IBM Secrets Manager
:shortname: ibm-secrets-manager
:artifactid: camel-ibm-secrets-manager
:description: Manage secrets in IBM Secrets Manager Service
:since: 4.11
:supportlevel: Preview
:tabs-sync-option:
:component-header: Only producer is supported
//Manually maintained attributes
:camel-spring-boot-name: ibm-secrets-manager

*Since Camel {since}*

*{component-header}*

The ibm-secrets-manager component that integrates https://www.ibm.com/products/secrets-manager[IBM Cloud Secrets Manager].


== URI Format

[source,xml]
------------------------------------------------------------
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.apache.camel</groupId>
    <artifactId>camel-ibm-secrets-manager</artifactId>
    <version>x.x.x</version>
    <!-- use the same version as your Camel core version -->
</dependency>
------------------------------------------------------------


// component-configure options: START

// component-configure options: END

// component options: START
include::partial$component-configure-options.adoc[]
include::partial$component-endpoint-options.adoc[]
// component options: END

// endpoint options: START

// endpoint options: END

// component headers: START
include::partial$component-endpoint-headers.adoc[]
// component headers: END

== Functionalities

The component supports operations at the producer level. Specifically, it provides the following functionalities:

* `createArbitrarySecret`
* `createKVSecret`
* `getSecret`
* `deleteSecret`

== Examples

=== Using IBM Secrets Manager Vault Property Function

To use this function, you'll need to provide credentials for IBM Secrets Manager vault as environment variables:

[source,bash]
----
export CAMEL_VAULT_IBM_TOKEN=token
export CAMEL_VAULT_IBM_SERVICE_URL=serviceUrl
----

You can also configure the credentials in the `application.properties` file such as:

[source,properties]
----
camel.vault.ibm.token = token
camel.vault.ibm.serviceUrl = serviceUrl
----

NOTE: if you're running the application on a Kubernetes based cloud platform, you can initialize the environment variables from a Secret or Configmap to enhance security. You can also enhance security by xref:manual::using-propertyplaceholder.adoc#_resolving_property_placeholders_on_cloud[setting a Secret property placeholder] which will be initialized at application runtime only.

NOTE: `camel.vault.ibm` configuration only applies to the IBM Secrets Manager Vault properties function (E.g when resolving properties).
When using the `operation` option to create, get, list secrets etc., you should provide the `token` and `serviceUrl` options.

At this point, you'll be able to reference a property in the following way:

[source,xml]
----
<camelContext>
    <route>
        <from uri="direct:start"/>
        <to uri="{{ibm:default:route}}"/>
    </route>
</camelContext>
----

Where route will be the name of the secret stored in the IBM Secrets Manager Vault instance, in the 'default' secret group.

You could specify a default value in case the secret is not present on IBM Secrets Manager Vault instance:

[source,xml]
----
<camelContext>
    <route>
        <from uri="direct:start"/>
        <to uri="{{ibm:default:route:default}}"/>
    </route>
</camelContext>
----

In this case, if the secret doesn't exist in the 'default' secret group, the property will fall back to "default" as value.

Also, you are able to get a particular field of the secret, if you have, for example, a secret named database of this form:

[source,bash]
----
{
  "username": "admin",
  "password": "password123",
  "engine": "postgres",
  "host": "127.0.0.1",
  "port": "3128",
  "dbname": "db"
}
----

You're able to do get single secret value in your route, in the 'default' secret group, like for example:

[source,xml]
----
<camelContext>
    <route>
        <from uri="direct:start"/>
        <log message="Username is {{ibm:default:database#username}}"/>
    </route>
</camelContext>
----

Or re-use the property as part of an endpoint.

You could specify a default value in case the particular field of secret is not present on IBM Secrets Manager Vault instance, in the 'secret' engine:

[source,xml]
----
<camelContext>
    <route>
        <from uri="direct:start"/>
        <log message="Username is {{ibm:default:database#username:admin}}"/>
    </route>
</camelContext>
----

In this case, if the secret doesn't exist or the secret exists (in the 'default' secret group) but the username field is not part of the secret, the property will fall back to "admin" as value.

There is also the syntax to get a particular version of the secret for both the approaches, with field/default value specified or only with secret:

[source,xml]
----
<camelContext>
    <route>
        <from uri="direct:start"/>
        <to uri="{{ibm:default:route@2}}"/>
    </route>
</camelContext>
----

This approach will return the RAW route secret with version '2', in the 'default' secret group.

[source,xml]
----
<camelContext>
    <route>
        <from uri="direct:start"/>
        <to uri="{{ibm:default:route:default@2}}"/>
    </route>
</camelContext>
----

This approach will return the route secret value with version '2' or default value in case the secret doesn't exist or the version doesn't exist (in the 'default' secret group).

[source,xml]
----
<camelContext>
    <route>
        <from uri="direct:start"/>
        <log message="Username is {{ibm:default:database#username:admin@2}}"/>
    </route>
</camelContext>
----

This approach will return the username field of the database secret with version '2' or admin in case the secret doesn't exist or the version doesn't exist (in the 'default' secret group).

The only requirement is adding the camel-ibm-secrets-manager jar to your Camel application.

=== Automatic Camel context reloading on Secret Refresh

Being able to reload Camel context on a Secret Refresh could be done by specifying the IBM Event Streams credentials combined with the IBM Secrets Manager one (the same used for IBM Secrets Manager Property Function).

With Environment variables:

[source,bash]
----
export CAMEL_VAULT_IBM_TOKEN=token
export CAMEL_VAULT_IBM_SERVICE_URL=serviceUrl
export CAMEL_VAULT_IBM_EVENTSTREAM_BOOTSTRAP_SERVERS=bootstrapServers
export CAMEL_VAULT_IBM_EVENTSTREAM_TOPIC=topic
export CAMEL_VAULT_IBM_EVENTSTREAM_USERNAME=token
export CAMEL_VAULT_IBM_EVENTSTREAM_PASSWORD=password
export CAMEL_VAULT_IBM_EVENTSTREAM_CONSUMER_GROUP_ID=groupId
export CAMEL_VAULT_IBM_EVENTSTREAM_CONSUMER_POLL_TIMEOUT=3000
----

or as plain Camel main properties:

[source,properties]
----
camel.vault.ibm.token = token
camel.vault.ibm.serviceUrl = serviceUrl
camel.vault.ibm.eventStreamBootstrapServers = bootstrapServers
camel.vault.ibm.eventStreamTopic = topic
camel.vault.ibm.eventStreamUsername = token
camel.vault.ibm.eventStreamPassword = password
camel.vault.ibm.eventStreamGroupId = groupId
camel.vault.ibm.eventStreamConsumerPollTimeout=3000
----

To enable the automatic refresh, you'll need additional properties to set:

[source,properties]
----
camel.vault.ibm.refreshEnabled=true
camel.vault.ibm.secrets=Secret
camel.main.context-reload-enabled = true
----

where `camel.vault.ibm.refreshEnabled` will enable the automatic context reload and `camel.vault.ibm.secrets` is a regex representing the secrets we want to track for updates.

Note that `camel.vault.ibm.secrets` is not mandatory: if not specified the task responsible for checking updates events will take into accounts or the properties with an `ibm:` prefix.

include::spring-boot:partial$starter.adoc[]

Commit message:

CAMEL-21918 - Camel-IBM-Secret-Manager: Document Refresh feature (#17637)
Signed-off-by: Andrea Cosentino <ancosen@gmail.com>

components/camel-ibm-secrets-manager/src/main/docs/ibm-secrets-manager-component.adoc, after:

= IBM Secrets Manager Component
:doctitle: IBM Secrets Manager
:shortname: ibm-secrets-manager
:artifactid: camel-ibm-secrets-manager
:description: Manage secrets in IBM Secrets Manager Service
:since: 4.11
:supportlevel: Preview
:tabs-sync-option:
:component-header: Only producer is supported
//Manually maintained attributes
:camel-spring-boot-name: ibm-secrets-manager

*Since Camel {since}*

*{component-header}*

The ibm-secrets-manager component that integrates https://www.ibm.com/products/secrets-manager[IBM Cloud Secrets Manager].


== URI Format

[source,xml]
------------------------------------------------------------
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.apache.camel</groupId>
    <artifactId>camel-ibm-secrets-manager</artifactId>
    <version>x.x.x</version>
    <!-- use the same version as your Camel core version -->
</dependency>
------------------------------------------------------------


// component-configure options: START

// component-configure options: END

// component options: START
include::partial$component-configure-options.adoc[]
include::partial$component-endpoint-options.adoc[]
// component options: END

// endpoint options: START

// endpoint options: END

// component headers: START
include::partial$component-endpoint-headers.adoc[]
// component headers: END

== Functionalities

The component supports operations at the producer level. Specifically, it provides the following functionalities:

* `createArbitrarySecret`
* `createKVSecret`
* `getSecret`
* `deleteSecret`

== Examples

=== Using IBM Secrets Manager Vault Property Function

To use this function, you'll need to provide credentials for IBM Secrets Manager vault as environment variables:

[source,bash]
----
export CAMEL_VAULT_IBM_TOKEN=token
export CAMEL_VAULT_IBM_SERVICE_URL=serviceUrl
----

You can also configure the credentials in the `application.properties` file such as:

[source,properties]
----
camel.vault.ibm.token = token
camel.vault.ibm.serviceUrl = serviceUrl
----

NOTE: if you're running the application on a Kubernetes based cloud platform, you can initialize the environment variables from a Secret or Configmap to enhance security. You can also enhance security by xref:manual::using-propertyplaceholder.adoc#_resolving_property_placeholders_on_cloud[setting a Secret property placeholder] which will be initialized at application runtime only.

NOTE: `camel.vault.ibm` configuration only applies to the IBM Secrets Manager Vault properties function (E.g when resolving properties).
When using the `operation` option to create, get, list secrets etc., you should provide the `token` and `serviceUrl` options.

At this point, you'll be able to reference a property in the following way:

[source,xml]
----
<camelContext>
    <route>
        <from uri="direct:start"/>
        <to uri="{{ibm:default:route}}"/>
    </route>
</camelContext>
----

Where route will be the name of the secret stored in the IBM Secrets Manager Vault instance, in the 'default' secret group.

You could specify a default value in case the secret is not present on IBM Secrets Manager Vault instance:

[source,xml]
----
<camelContext>
    <route>
        <from uri="direct:start"/>
        <to uri="{{ibm:default:route:default}}"/>
    </route>
</camelContext>
----

In this case, if the secret doesn't exist in the 'default' secret group, the property will fall back to "default" as value.

Also, you are able to get a particular field of the secret, if you have, for example, a secret named database of this form:

[source,bash]
----
{
  "username": "admin",
  "password": "password123",
  "engine": "postgres",
  "host": "127.0.0.1",
  "port": "3128",
  "dbname": "db"
}
----

You're able to do get single secret value in your route, in the 'default' secret group, like for example:

[source,xml]
----
<camelContext>
    <route>
        <from uri="direct:start"/>
        <log message="Username is {{ibm:default:database#username}}"/>
    </route>
</camelContext>
----

Or re-use the property as part of an endpoint.

You could specify a default value in case the particular field of secret is not present on IBM Secrets Manager Vault instance, in the 'secret' engine:

[source,xml]
----
<camelContext>
    <route>
        <from uri="direct:start"/>
        <log message="Username is {{ibm:default:database#username:admin}}"/>
    </route>
</camelContext>
----

In this case, if the secret doesn't exist or the secret exists (in the 'default' secret group) but the username field is not part of the secret, the property will fall back to "admin" as value.

There is also the syntax to get a particular version of the secret for both the approaches, with field/default value specified or only with secret:

[source,xml]
----
<camelContext>
    <route>
        <from uri="direct:start"/>
        <to uri="{{ibm:default:route@2}}"/>
    </route>
</camelContext>
----

This approach will return the RAW route secret with version '2', in the 'default' secret group.

[source,xml]
----
<camelContext>
    <route>
        <from uri="direct:start"/>
        <to uri="{{ibm:default:route:default@2}}"/>
    </route>
</camelContext>
----

This approach will return the route secret value with version '2' or default value in case the secret doesn't exist or the version doesn't exist (in the 'default' secret group).

[source,xml]
----
<camelContext>
    <route>
        <from uri="direct:start"/>
        <log message="Username is {{ibm:default:database#username:admin@2}}"/>
    </route>
</camelContext>
----

This approach will return the username field of the database secret with version '2' or admin in case the secret doesn't exist or the version doesn't exist (in the 'default' secret group).

The only requirement is adding the camel-ibm-secrets-manager jar to your Camel application.

=== Automatic Camel context reloading on Secret Refresh

Being able to reload Camel context on a Secret Refresh could be done by specifying the IBM Event Streams credentials combined with the IBM Secrets Manager one (the same used for IBM Secrets Manager Property Function).

With Environment variables:

[source,bash]
----
export CAMEL_VAULT_IBM_TOKEN=token
export CAMEL_VAULT_IBM_SERVICE_URL=serviceUrl
export CAMEL_VAULT_IBM_EVENTSTREAM_BOOTSTRAP_SERVERS=bootstrapServers
export CAMEL_VAULT_IBM_EVENTSTREAM_TOPIC=topic
export CAMEL_VAULT_IBM_EVENTSTREAM_USERNAME=token
export CAMEL_VAULT_IBM_EVENTSTREAM_PASSWORD=password
export CAMEL_VAULT_IBM_EVENTSTREAM_CONSUMER_GROUP_ID=groupId
export CAMEL_VAULT_IBM_EVENTSTREAM_CONSUMER_POLL_TIMEOUT=3000
----

or as plain Camel main properties:

[source,properties]
----
camel.vault.ibm.token = token
camel.vault.ibm.serviceUrl = serviceUrl
camel.vault.ibm.eventStreamBootstrapServers = bootstrapServers
camel.vault.ibm.eventStreamTopic = topic
camel.vault.ibm.eventStreamUsername = token
camel.vault.ibm.eventStreamPassword = password
camel.vault.ibm.eventStreamGroupId = groupId
camel.vault.ibm.eventStreamConsumerPollTimeout=3000
----

To enable the automatic refresh, you'll need additional properties to set:

[source,properties]
----
camel.vault.ibm.refreshEnabled=true
camel.vault.ibm.secrets=Secret
camel.main.context-reload-enabled = true
----

where `camel.vault.ibm.refreshEnabled` will enable the automatic context reload and `camel.vault.ibm.secrets` is a regex representing the secrets we want to track for updates.

where `camel.vault.ibm.eventStreamBootstrapServers` is the comma-separated list of Bootstrap Servers for IBM Event Stream, `camel.vault.ibm.eventStreamTopic`, `camel.vault.ibm.eventStreamUsername`, `camel.vault.ibm.eventStreamPassword`, `camel.vault.ibm.eventStreamGroupId` and `camel.vault.ibm.eventStreamConsumerPollTimeout` are the IBM Event Stream parameters for connecting and consuming events related to Secrets.

Note that `camel.vault.ibm.secrets` is not mandatory: if not specified the task responsible for checking updates events will take into accounts or the properties with an `ibm:` prefix.

include::spring-boot:partial$starter.adoc[]
