[[MessageTranslator-MessageTranslator]]
Message Translator
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Camel supports the
http://www.enterpriseintegrationpatterns.com/MessageTranslator.html[Message
Translator] from the link:enterprise-integration-patterns.html[EIP
patterns] by using an arbitrary link:processor.html[Processor] in the
routing logic, by using a link:bean-integration.html[bean] to perform
the transformation, or by using transform() in the DSL. You can also use
a link:data-format.html[Data Format] to marshal and unmarshal messages
in different encodings.

image:http://www.enterpriseintegrationpatterns.com/img/MessageTranslator.gif[image]

*Using the link:fluent-builders.html[Fluent Builders]*

You can transform a message using Camel's
link:bean-integration.html[Bean Integration] to call any method on a
bean in your link:registry.html[Registry] such as your
link:spring.html[Spring] XML configuration file as follows

[source,java]
-----------------------------------------------
from("activemq:SomeQueue").
  beanRef("myTransformerBean", "myMethodName").
  to("mqseries:AnotherQueue");
-----------------------------------------------

Where the "myTransformerBean" would be defined in a Spring XML file or
defined in JNDI etc. You can omit the method name parameter from
beanRef() and the link:bean-integration.html[Bean Integration] will try
to deduce the method to invoke from the message exchange.

or you can add your own explicit link:processor.html[Processor] to do
the transformation

or you can use the DSL to explicitly configure the transformation

*Use Spring XML*

You can also use link:spring-xml-extensions.html[Spring XML Extensions]
to do a transformation. Basically any link:expression.html[Expression]
language can be substituted inside the transform element as shown below

Or you can use the link:bean-integration.html[Bean Integration] to
invoke a bean

[source,java]
-----------------------------------------------
<route>
  <from uri="activemq:Input"/>
  <bean ref="myBeanName" method="doTransform"/>
  <to uri="activemq:Output"/>
</route>
-----------------------------------------------

You can also use link:templating.html[Templating] to consume a message
from one destination, transform it with something like
link:velocity.html[Velocity] or link:xquery.html[XQuery] and then send
it on to another destination. For example using InOnly (one way
messaging)

[source,java]
----------------------------------------
from("activemq:My.Queue").
  to("velocity:com/acme/MyResponse.vm").
  to("activemq:Another.Queue");
----------------------------------------

If you want to use InOut (request-reply) semantics to process requests
on the *My.Queue* queue on link:activemq.html[ActiveMQ] with a template
generated response, then sending responses back to the JMSReplyTo
Destination you could use this.

[source,java]
----------------------------------------
from("activemq:My.Queue").
  to("velocity:com/acme/MyResponse.vm");
----------------------------------------

[[MessageTranslator-UsingThisPattern]]
Using This Pattern
++++++++++++++++++

If you would like to use this EIP Pattern then please read the
link:getting-started.html[Getting Started], you may also find the
link:architecture.html[Architecture] useful particularly the description
of link:endpoint.html[Endpoint] and link:uris.html[URIs]. Then you could
try out some of the link:examples.html[Examples] first before trying
this pattern out.

* link:content-enricher.html[Content Enricher]
* link:using-getin-or-getout-methods-on-exchange.html[Using getIn or
getOut methods on Exchange]

