test-infra/camel-test-infra-cli/README.adoc, before:

:image-name: fedora
:config-class: src/test/java/org/apache/camel/test/infra/cli/common/CliProperties.java

= Camel JBang CLI container

== Overview

This module is used to build a container based on {image-name} image and Camel JBang.

== Configuration

System variables are defined in link:{config-class}[CliProperties]

 - `cli.service.repo` : the repo on github, default `apache/camel`
 - `cli.service.branch` : the branch of the repo on github, default `main`
 - `cli.service.version` : the version of the `camel.jbang.version` and the `camel-kamelets.version` defined in the `CamelJBang.java` file, default value is `default`, it means it uses the default values in the file
 - `cli.service.data.folder` : mandatory - path to local folder to bind as volume in the container
 - `cli.service.ssh.password` : ssh password set to access to the container via ssh, default `jbang`
 - `cli.service.execute.version` : Camel version set just after container start, default is empty so the version is the one in the branch
 - `cli.service.mvn.repos` : comma separated list of custom Maven repositories, default empty
 - `cli.service.extra.hosts` : comma separated host=ip pairs to add in the hosts file
 - `cli.service.trusted.paths` : commas separated paths, relative to the host, of the files containing PEM trusted certificates

Commit message:

camel-test-infra-cli: Adds the parameter to mount local maven repository

test-infra/camel-test-infra-cli/README.adoc, after:

:image-name: fedora
:config-class: src/test/java/org/apache/camel/test/infra/cli/common/CliProperties.java

= Camel JBang CLI container

== Overview

This module is used to build a container based on {image-name} image and Camel JBang.

== Configuration

System variables are defined in link:{config-class}[CliProperties]

 - `cli.service.repo` : the repo on github, default `apache/camel`
 - `cli.service.branch` : the branch of the repo on github, default `main`
 - `cli.service.version` : the version of the `camel.jbang.version` and the `camel-kamelets.version` defined in the `CamelJBang.java` file, default value is `default`, it means it uses the default values in the file
 - `cli.service.data.folder` : mandatory - path to local folder to bind as volume in the container
 - `cli.service.ssh.password` : ssh password set to access to the container via ssh, default `jbang`
 - `cli.service.execute.version` : Camel version set just after container start, default is empty so the version is the one in the branch
 - `cli.service.mvn.repos` : comma separated list of custom Maven repositories, default empty
 - `cli.service.mvn.local` : path to the host folder mounted as container local maven repository
 - `cli.service.extra.hosts` : comma separated host=ip pairs to add in the hosts file
 - `cli.service.trusted.paths` : commas separated paths, relative to the host, of the files containing PEM trusted certificates
