components/camel-mock/src/main/docs/mock-component.adoc, before:

= Mock Component
:doctitle: Mock
:shortname: mock
:artifactid: camel-mock
:description: Test routes and mediation rules using mocks.
:since: 1.0
:supportlevel: Stable
:tabs-sync-option:
:component-header: Only producer is supported
:core:
//Manually maintained attributes
:camel-spring-boot-name: mock

*Since Camel {since}*

*{component-header}*

Testing of distributed and asynchronous processing is
notoriously challenging. The xref:mock-component.adoc[Mock]
and xref:dataset-component.adoc[DataSet] endpoints work with the
Camel Testing Framework to simplify your unit and
integration testing using
xref:eips:enterprise-integration-patterns.adoc[Enterprise Integration
Patterns] and Camel's large range of Components
together with the powerful Bean Integration.

== URI format

----
mock:someName[?options]
----

Where `someName` can be any string that uniquely identifies the
endpoint.

// component-configure options: START

// component-configure options: END

// component options: START
include::partial$component-configure-options.adoc[]
include::partial$component-endpoint-options.adoc[]
// component options: END

// endpoint options: START

// endpoint options: END

== Usage

The Mock component provides a powerful declarative testing mechanism,
which is similar to http://www.jmock.org[jMock] in
that it allows declarative expectations to be created on any Mock
endpoint before a test begins. Then the test is run, which typically
fires messages to one or more endpoints, and finally the expectations
can be asserted in a test case to ensure the system worked as expected.

This allows you to test various things like:

* The correct number of messages is received on each endpoint.
* The correct payloads are received, in the right order.
* Messages arrive at an endpoint in order, using some
Expression to create an order testing function.
* Messages arrive match some kind of Predicate such
as that specific headers have certain values, or that parts of the
messages match some predicate, such as by evaluating an
xref:languages:xpath-language.adoc[XPath] or xref:languages:xquery-language.adoc[XQuery]
Expression.

[NOTE]
====
There is also the xref:others:test-junit5.adoc[Test endpoint], which is a
Mock endpoint, but which uses a second endpoint to provide the list of
expected message bodies and automatically sets up the Mock endpoint
assertions. In other words, it's a Mock endpoint that automatically sets
up its assertions from some sample messages in a File
or xref:jpa-component.adoc[database], for example.
====

[CAUTION]
====
*Mock endpoints keep received Exchanges in memory indefinitely.*

Remember that Mock is designed for testing. When you add Mock endpoints
to a route, each Exchange sent to the endpoint will
be stored (to allow for later validation) in memory until explicitly
reset or the JVM is restarted. If you are sending high volume and/or
large messages, this may cause excessive memory use. If your goal is to
test deployable routes inline, consider using
NotifyBuilder or
AdviceWith in your tests instead of adding Mock
endpoints to routes directly.
There are two new options `retainFirst`, and
`retainLast` that can be used to limit the number of messages the Mock
endpoints keep in memory.
====

== Examples

=== Simple Example

Here's a simple example of Mock endpoint in use. First, the endpoint is
resolved on the context. Then we set an expectation, and then, after the
test has run, we assert that our expectations have been met:

[source,java]
----
MockEndpoint resultEndpoint = context.getEndpoint("mock:foo", MockEndpoint.class);

// set expectations
resultEndpoint.expectedMessageCount(2);

// send some messages

// now let's assert that the mock:foo endpoint received 2 messages
resultEndpoint.assertIsSatisfied();
----

You typically always call the
https://www.javadoc.io/doc/org.apache.camel/camel-mock/latest/org/apache/camel/component/mock/MockEndpoint.html#assertIsSatisfied--[`assertIsSatisfied()`]
method to test that the expectations were met after running a test.

Camel will by default wait 10 seconds when the `assertIsSatisfied()` is
invoked. This can be configured by setting the
`setResultWaitTime(millis)` method.

=== Using assertPeriod

When the assertion is satisfied then Camel will stop waiting and
continue from the `assertIsSatisfied` method. That means if a new
message arrives at the mock endpoint, just a bit later. That arrival
will not affect the outcome of the assertion. Suppose you do want to
test that no new messages arrives after a period thereafter, then you
can do that by setting the `setAssertPeriod` method, for example:

[source,java]
----
MockEndpoint resultEndpoint = context.getEndpoint("mock:foo", MockEndpoint.class);
resultEndpoint.setAssertPeriod(5000);
resultEndpoint.expectedMessageCount(2);

// send some messages

// now let's assert that the mock:foo endpoint received 2 messages
resultEndpoint.assertIsSatisfied();
----

=== Setting expectations

You can see from the Javadoc of
https://www.javadoc.io/doc/org.apache.camel/camel-mock/current/org/apache/camel/component/mock/MockEndpoint.html[MockEndpoint]
the various helper methods you can use to set expectations. The main
methods are as follows:

[width="100%",cols="1m,1",options="header",]
|===
|Method |Description
|https://www.javadoc.io/doc/org.apache.camel/camel-mock/current/org/apache/camel/component/mock/MockEndpoint.html#expectedMessageCount(int)[expectedMessageCount(int)]
|To define the expected count of messages on the endpoint.

|https://www.javadoc.io/doc/org.apache.camel/camel-mock/current/org/apache/camel/component/mock/MockEndpoint.html#expectedMinimumMessageCount(int)[expectedMinimumMessageCount(int)]
|To define the minimum number of expected messages on the endpoint.

|https://www.javadoc.io/doc/org.apache.camel/camel-mock/latest/org/apache/camel/component/mock/MockEndpoint.html#expectedBodiesReceived(java.util.List)[expectedBodiesReceived(...)]
|To define the expected bodies that should be received (in order).

|https://www.javadoc.io/doc/org.apache.camel/camel-mock/latest/org/apache/camel/component/mock/MockEndpoint.html#expectedHeaderReceived(java.lang.String,java.lang.Object)[expectedHeaderReceived(...)]
|To define the expected header that should be received

|https://www.javadoc.io/doc/org.apache.camel/camel-mock/current/org/apache/camel/component/mock/MockEndpoint.html#expectsAscending(org.apache.camel.Expression)[expectsAscending(Expression)]
|To add an expectation that messages are received in order, using the
given Expression to compare messages.

|https://www.javadoc.io/doc/org.apache.camel/camel-mock/current/org/apache/camel/component/mock/MockEndpoint.html#expectsDescending(org.apache.camel.Expression)[expectsDescending(Expression)]
|To add an expectation that messages are received in order, using the
given Expression to compare messages.

|https://www.javadoc.io/doc/org.apache.camel/camel-mock/current/org/apache/camel/component/mock/MockEndpoint.html#expectsNoDuplicates(org.apache.camel.Expression)[expectsNoDuplicates(Expression)]
|To add an expectation that no duplicate messages are received; using an
Expression to calculate a unique identifier for
each message. This could be something like the `JMSMessageID` if using
JMS, or some unique reference number within the message.
|===

Here's another example:

[source,java]
----
resultEndpoint.expectedBodiesReceived("firstMessageBody", "secondMessageBody", "thirdMessageBody");
----

=== Adding expectations to specific messages

In addition, you can use the
https://javadoc.io/doc/org.apache.camel/camel-mock/latest/org/apache/camel/component/mock/MockEndpoint.html[`message(int
messageIndex)`] method to add assertions about a specific message that is
received.

For example, to add expectations of the headers or body of the first
message (using zero-based indexing like `java.util.List`), you can use
the following code:

[source,java]
----
resultEndpoint.message(0).header("foo").isEqualTo("bar");
----

There are some examples of the Mock endpoint in use in the
https://github.com/apache/camel/tree/main/core/camel-core/src/test/java/org/apache/camel/processor[`camel-core`
processor tests].

==== Using built-in language for expectations

When you want to check that a given message body or header is as expected, and the format is XML or JSon,
then you can use the Camel languages to perform the validation.

This section covers the built-in support in the mock component for commonly used languages.
See next section for how to use all the Camel languages using the language builder style.

You can use regular expressions as expectations, as follows:

[source,java]
----
mock.message(1).header("cheese").regex("value[2,3]");
mock.message(2).header("cheese").regex("value[2,3]");
// should not match
mock.message(0).header("cheese").not().regex("value[2,3]");
mock.message(3).header("cheese").not().regex("value[2,3]");
----

Here we use the _built-in_ `regex` function from the mock component, that makes
coding this easier. There are a limited set of functions out of the box.

You can also use XPath as follows:

[source,java]
----
String filter = "/person[@name='James']";
...
mock.message(0).header("cheese").xpath(filter).isFalse();
mock.message(1).header("cheese").xpath(filter).isTrue();
mock.message(2).header("cheese").xpath(filter).isFalse();
----

You can also use xpath to check if it matches a given value such as:

[source,java]
----
String name = "/person/@name";
...
mock.message(0).header("cheese").xpath(name).isEqualTo("Hiram");
mock.message(1).header("cheese").xpath(name).isEqualTo("James");
mock.message(2).header("cheese").xpath(name).isEqualTo("Jack");
----

There are a number of built-in languages you can use, see next section for using all the languages.

==== Using all the language for expectations using language builder

When you want to check that a given message body or header is as expected, and the format is XML or JSon,
then you can use the Camel languages to perform the validation.

For example to check whether a header matches a XPath you can do as follows:

[source,java]
----
// setup the xpath once
var xpath = expression().xpath("/person[@name='James']").source("header:cheese").end();

// message 0 should not match, message 1 should match, message 2 should not match
mock.message(0).predicate(not(xpath));
mock.message(1).predicate(xpath);
mock.message(2).predicate(not(xpath));
----

Notice how we can create the expectation using the `expression()` fluent builder, that allows
you to use any of the many Camel languages, and to configure every option you may desire.

If you only need to use the expectation once, you can inline this directly in the mock as follows:

[source,java]
----
mock.message(1).predicate(expression().xpath("/person[@name='James']").source("header:cheese").end());
----

Notice that the xpath language need to use `source` to refer to the value should be from the header with key cheese.
By default, the source is the message body, and therefore is only needed when you refer to headers/variables etc.

To use any of the Camel languages then do as shown previously with the XPath example.

=== Mocking existing endpoints

Camel now allows you to automatically mock existing endpoints in your
Camel routes.

[NOTE]
*How it works* The endpoints are still in action. What happens differently
is that a xref:mock-component.adoc[Mock] endpoint is injected and receives the
message first and then delegates the message to the target endpoint. You
can view this as a kind of intercept and delegate or endpoint listener.

Suppose you have the given route below:

[source,java]
.*Route*
----
include::{examplesdir}/core/camel-core/src/test/java/org/apache/camel/processor/interceptor/AdviceWithMockEndpointsTest.java[tags=route]
----

You can then use the `adviceWith` feature in Camel to mock all the
endpoints in a given route from your unit test, as shown below:

[source,java]
.*`adviceWith` mocking all endpoints*
----
include::{examplesdir}/core/camel-core/src/test/java/org/apache/camel/processor/interceptor/AdviceWithMockEndpointsTest.java[tags=e1]
----

Notice that the mock endpoint is given the URI `mock:<endpoint>`, for
example `mock:direct:foo`. Camel logs at `INFO` level the endpoints
being mocked:

----
INFO  Adviced endpoint [direct://foo] with mock endpoint [mock:direct:foo]
----

[NOTE]
 **Mocked endpoints are without parameters** +
Endpoints which are mocked will have their parameters stripped off. For
example, the endpoint `log:foo?showAll=true` will be mocked to the
following endpoint `mock:log:foo`. Notice the parameters have been
removed.

It's also possible to only mock certain endpoints using a pattern. For
example to mock all `log` endpoints you do as shown:

[source,java]
.*`adviceWith` mocking only log endpoints using a pattern*
----
include::{examplesdir}/core/camel-core/src/test/java/org/apache/camel/processor/interceptor/AdviceWithMockEndpointsTest.java[tags=e2]
----

The pattern supported can be a wildcard or a regular expression. See
more details about this at Intercept as it is the
same matching function used by Camel.

[NOTE]
Mind that mocking endpoints causes the messages to be copied when they
arrive at the mock.
That means Camel will use more memory. This may not be suitable when you
send in a lot of messages.


=== Mocking existing endpoints using the `camel-test` component

Instead of using the `adviceWith` to instruct Camel to mock endpoints,
you can easily enable this behavior when using the `camel-test` Test
Kit.

The same route can be tested as follows. Notice that we return `"*"`
from the `isMockEndpoints` method, which tells Camel to mock all
endpoints.

If you only want to mock all `log` endpoints you can return `"log*"`
instead.

[source,java]
.*`isMockEndpoints` using camel-test kit*
----
include::{examplesdir}/components/camel-test/camel-test-junit5/src/test/java/org/apache/camel/test/junit5/patterns/IsMockEndpointsJUnit5Test.java[tags=e1]
----


=== Mocking existing endpoints with XML DSL

If you do not use the `camel-test` component for unit testing (as shown
above) you can use a different approach when using XML files for
routes.

The solution is to create a new XML file used by the unit test and then
include the intended XML file which has the route you want to test.

Suppose we have the route in the `camel-route.xml` file:

[source,xml]
.*camel-route.xml*
----
include::{examplesdir}/components/camel-spring-xml/src/test/resources/org/apache/camel/spring/mock/camel-route.xml[tags=e1]
----

Then we create a new XML file as follows, where we include the
`camel-route.xml` file and define a spring bean with the class
`org.apache.camel.impl.InterceptSendToMockEndpointStrategy` which tells
Camel to mock all endpoints:

[source,xml]
.*test-camel-route.xml*
----
include::{examplesdir}/components/camel-spring-xml/src/test/resources/org/apache/camel/spring/mock/InterceptSendToMockEndpointStrategyTest.xml[tags=e1]
----

Then in your unit test you load the new XML file
(`test-camel-route.xml`) instead of `camel-route.xml`.

To only mock all xref:log-component.adoc[Log] endpoints, you can define the pattern
in the constructor for the bean:

[source,xml]
----
<bean id="mockAllEndpoints" class="org.apache.camel.impl.InterceptSendToMockEndpointStrategy">
    <constructor-arg index="0" value="log*"/>
</bean>
----

=== Mocking endpoints and skip sending to original endpoint

Sometimes you want to easily mock and skip sending to certain
endpoints. So the message is detoured and send to the mock endpoint
only. You can now use the `mockEndpointsAndSkip`
method using AdviceWith. The example below will skip sending to the two endpoints
`"direct:foo"`, and `"direct:bar"`.

[source,java]
.*adviceWith mock and skip sending to endpoints*
----
include::{examplesdir}/core/camel-core/src/test/java/org/apache/camel/processor/interceptor/AdviceWithMockMultipleEndpointsWithSkipTest.java[tags=e1]
----

The same example using the Test Kit

[source,java]
.*isMockEndpointsAndSkip using camel-test kit*
----
include::{examplesdir}/components/camel-test/camel-test-junit5/src/test/java/org/apache/camel/test/junit5/patterns/IsMockEndpointsAndSkipJUnit5Test.java[tags=e1]
----

=== Limiting the number of messages to keep

The xref:mock-component.adoc[Mock] endpoints will by default keep a copy of every
Exchange that it received. So if you test with a lot
of messages, then it will consume memory. +
We have introduced two options `retainFirst` and
`retainLast` that can be used to specify to only keep Nth of the first
and/or last Exchanges.

For example, in the code below, we only want to retain a copy of the
first five and last five Exchanges the mock receives.

[source,java]
----
  MockEndpoint mock = getMockEndpoint("mock:data");
  mock.setRetainFirst(5);
  mock.setRetainLast(5);
  mock.expectedMessageCount(2000);

  mock.assertIsSatisfied();
----

Using this has some limitations. The `getExchanges()` and
`getReceivedExchanges()` methods on the `MockEndpoint` will return only
the retained copies of the Exchanges. So in the
example above, the list will contain 10 Exchanges;
the first five, and the last five. +
The `retainFirst` and `retainLast` options also have limitations on
which expectation methods you can use. For example, the `expectedXXX`
methods that work on message bodies, headers, etc. will only operate on
the retained messages. In the example above, they can test only the
expectations on the 10 retained messages.

=== Testing with arrival times

The xref:mock-component.adoc[Mock] endpoint stores the arrival time of the message
as a property on the Exchange.

[source,java]
----
Date time = exchange.getProperty(Exchange.RECEIVED_TIMESTAMP, Date.class);
----

You can use this information to know when the message arrived at the
mock. But it also provides foundation to know the time interval between
the previous and next message arrived at the mock. You can use this to
set expectations using the `arrives` DSL on the xref:mock-component.adoc[Mock]
endpoint.

For example, to say that the first message should arrive between 0 and 2
seconds before the next you can do:

[source,java]
----
mock.message(0).arrives().noLaterThan(2).seconds().beforeNext();
----

You can also define this as that second message (0 index based) should
arrive no later than 0 and 2 seconds after the previous:

[source,java]
----
mock.message(1).arrives().noLaterThan(2).seconds().afterPrevious();
----

You can also use between to set a lower bound. For example, suppose that
it should be between 1 and 4 seconds:

[source,java]
----
mock.message(1).arrives().between(1, 4).seconds().afterPrevious();
----

You can also set the expectation on all messages, for example, to say
that the gap between them should be at most 1 second:

[source,java]
----
mock.allMessages().arrives().noLaterThan(1).seconds().beforeNext();
----

[TIP]
====
*Time units* 

In the example above we use `seconds` as the time unit, but Camel offers
`milliseconds`, and `minutes` as well.
====



include::spring-boot:partial$starter.adoc[]

Commit message:

CAMEL-21402: Mock endpoints can now use all the standard languages more easily in fluent expecation builders and also custom functions in Java lined code

components/camel-mock/src/main/docs/mock-component.adoc, after:

= Mock Component
:doctitle: Mock
:shortname: mock
:artifactid: camel-mock
:description: Test routes and mediation rules using mocks.
:since: 1.0
:supportlevel: Stable
:tabs-sync-option:
:component-header: Only producer is supported
:core:
//Manually maintained attributes
:camel-spring-boot-name: mock

*Since Camel {since}*

*{component-header}*

Testing of distributed and asynchronous processing is
notoriously challenging. The xref:mock-component.adoc[Mock]
and xref:dataset-component.adoc[DataSet] endpoints work with the
Camel Testing Framework to simplify your unit and
integration testing using
xref:eips:enterprise-integration-patterns.adoc[Enterprise Integration
Patterns] and Camel's large range of Components
together with the powerful Bean Integration.

== URI format

----
mock:someName[?options]
----

Where `someName` can be any string that uniquely identifies the
endpoint.

// component-configure options: START

// component-configure options: END

// component options: START
include::partial$component-configure-options.adoc[]
include::partial$component-endpoint-options.adoc[]
// component options: END

// endpoint options: START

// endpoint options: END

== Usage

The Mock component provides a powerful declarative testing mechanism,
which is similar to http://www.jmock.org[jMock] in
that it allows declarative expectations to be created on any Mock
endpoint before a test begins. Then the test is run, which typically
fires messages to one or more endpoints, and finally the expectations
can be asserted in a test case to ensure the system worked as expected.

This allows you to test various things like:

* The correct number of messages is received on each endpoint.
* The correct payloads are received, in the right order.
* Messages arrive at an endpoint in order, using some
Expression to create an order testing function.
* Messages arrive match some kind of Predicate such
as that specific headers have certain values, or that parts of the
messages match some predicate, such as by evaluating an
xref:languages:xpath-language.adoc[XPath] or xref:languages:xquery-language.adoc[XQuery]
Expression.

[NOTE]
====
There is also the xref:others:test-junit5.adoc[Test endpoint], which is a
Mock endpoint, but which uses a second endpoint to provide the list of
expected message bodies and automatically sets up the Mock endpoint
assertions. In other words, it's a Mock endpoint that automatically sets
up its assertions from some sample messages in a File
or xref:jpa-component.adoc[database], for example.
====

[CAUTION]
====
*Mock endpoints keep received Exchanges in memory indefinitely.*

Remember that Mock is designed for testing. When you add Mock endpoints
to a route, each Exchange sent to the endpoint will
be stored (to allow for later validation) in memory until explicitly
reset or the JVM is restarted. If you are sending high volume and/or
large messages, this may cause excessive memory use. If your goal is to
test deployable routes inline, consider using
NotifyBuilder or
AdviceWith in your tests instead of adding Mock
endpoints to routes directly.
There are two new options `retainFirst`, and
`retainLast` that can be used to limit the number of messages the Mock
endpoints keep in memory.
====

== Examples

=== Simple Example

Here's a simple example of Mock endpoint in use. First, the endpoint is
resolved on the context. Then we set an expectation, and then, after the
test has run, we assert that our expectations have been met:

[source,java]
----
MockEndpoint resultEndpoint = context.getEndpoint("mock:foo", MockEndpoint.class);

// set expectations
resultEndpoint.expectedMessageCount(2);

// send some messages

// now let's assert that the mock:foo endpoint received 2 messages
resultEndpoint.assertIsSatisfied();
----

You typically always call the
https://www.javadoc.io/doc/org.apache.camel/camel-mock/latest/org/apache/camel/component/mock/MockEndpoint.html#assertIsSatisfied--[`assertIsSatisfied()`]
method to test that the expectations were met after running a test.

Camel will by default wait 10 seconds when the `assertIsSatisfied()` is
invoked. This can be configured by setting the
`setResultWaitTime(millis)` method.

=== Using assertPeriod

When the assertion is satisfied then Camel will stop waiting and
continue from the `assertIsSatisfied` method. That means if a new
message arrives at the mock endpoint, just a bit later. That arrival
will not affect the outcome of the assertion. Suppose you do want to
test that no new messages arrives after a period thereafter, then you
can do that by setting the `setAssertPeriod` method, for example:

[source,java]
----
MockEndpoint resultEndpoint = context.getEndpoint("mock:foo", MockEndpoint.class);
resultEndpoint.setAssertPeriod(5000);
resultEndpoint.expectedMessageCount(2);

// send some messages

// now let's assert that the mock:foo endpoint received 2 messages
resultEndpoint.assertIsSatisfied();
----

=== Setting expectations

You can see from the Javadoc of
https://www.javadoc.io/doc/org.apache.camel/camel-mock/current/org/apache/camel/component/mock/MockEndpoint.html[MockEndpoint]
the various helper methods you can use to set expectations. The main
methods are as follows:

[width="100%",cols="1m,1",options="header",]
|===
|Method |Description
|https://www.javadoc.io/doc/org.apache.camel/camel-mock/current/org/apache/camel/component/mock/MockEndpoint.html#expectedMessageCount(int)[expectedMessageCount(int)]
|To define the expected count of messages on the endpoint.

|https://www.javadoc.io/doc/org.apache.camel/camel-mock/current/org/apache/camel/component/mock/MockEndpoint.html#expectedMinimumMessageCount(int)[expectedMinimumMessageCount(int)]
|To define the minimum number of expected messages on the endpoint.

|https://www.javadoc.io/doc/org.apache.camel/camel-mock/latest/org/apache/camel/component/mock/MockEndpoint.html#expectedBodiesReceived(java.util.List)[expectedBodiesReceived(...)]
|To define the expected bodies that should be received (in order).

|https://www.javadoc.io/doc/org.apache.camel/camel-mock/latest/org/apache/camel/component/mock/MockEndpoint.html#expectedHeaderReceived(java.lang.String,java.lang.Object)[expectedHeaderReceived(...)]
|To define the expected header that should be received

|https://www.javadoc.io/doc/org.apache.camel/camel-mock/current/org/apache/camel/component/mock/MockEndpoint.html#expectsAscending(org.apache.camel.Expression)[expectsAscending(Expression)]
|To add an expectation that messages are received in order, using the
given Expression to compare messages.

|https://www.javadoc.io/doc/org.apache.camel/camel-mock/current/org/apache/camel/component/mock/MockEndpoint.html#expectsDescending(org.apache.camel.Expression)[expectsDescending(Expression)]
|To add an expectation that messages are received in order, using the
given Expression to compare messages.

|https://www.javadoc.io/doc/org.apache.camel/camel-mock/current/org/apache/camel/component/mock/MockEndpoint.html#expectsNoDuplicates(org.apache.camel.Expression)[expectsNoDuplicates(Expression)]
|To add an expectation that no duplicate messages are received; using an
Expression to calculate a unique identifier for
each message. This could be something like the `JMSMessageID` if using
JMS, or some unique reference number within the message.
|===

Here's another example:

[source,java]
----
resultEndpoint.expectedBodiesReceived("firstMessageBody", "secondMessageBody", "thirdMessageBody");
----

=== Adding expectations to specific messages

In addition, you can use the
https://javadoc.io/doc/org.apache.camel/camel-mock/latest/org/apache/camel/component/mock/MockEndpoint.html[`message(int
messageIndex)`] method to add assertions about a specific message that is
received.

For example, to add expectations of the headers or body of the first
message (using zero-based indexing like `java.util.List`), you can use
the following code:

[source,java]
----
resultEndpoint.message(0).header("foo").isEqualTo("bar");
----

There are some examples of the Mock endpoint in use in the
https://github.com/apache/camel/tree/main/core/camel-core/src/test/java/org/apache/camel/processor[`camel-core`
processor tests].

==== Using built-in language for expectations

When you want to check that a given message body or header is as expected, and the format is XML or JSon,
then you can use the Camel languages to perform the validation.

This section covers the built-in support in the mock component for commonly used languages.
See next section for how to use all the Camel languages using the language builder style.

You can use regular expressions as expectations, as follows:

[source,java]
----
mock.message(1).header("cheese").regex("value[2,3]");
mock.message(2).header("cheese").regex("value[2,3]");
// should not match
mock.message(0).header("cheese").not().regex("value[2,3]");
mock.message(3).header("cheese").not().regex("value[2,3]");
----

Here we use the _built-in_ `regex` function from the mock component, that makes
coding this easier. There are a limited set of functions out of the box.

You can also use XPath as follows:

[source,java]
----
String filter = "/person[@name='James']";
...
mock.message(0).header("cheese").xpath(filter).isFalse();
mock.message(1).header("cheese").xpath(filter).isTrue();
mock.message(2).header("cheese").xpath(filter).isFalse();
----

You can also use xpath to check if it matches a given value such as:

[source,java]
----
String name = "/person/@name";
...
mock.message(0).header("cheese").xpath(name).isEqualTo("Hiram");
mock.message(1).header("cheese").xpath(name).isEqualTo("James");
mock.message(2).header("cheese").xpath(name).isEqualTo("Jack");
----

There are a number of built-in languages you can use, see next section for using all the languages.

==== Using all the language for expectations using language builder

When you want to check that a given message body or header is as expected, and the format is XML or JSon,
then you can use the Camel languages to perform the validation.

For example to check whether a header matches a XPath you can do as follows:

[source,java]
----
// setup the xpath once
var xpath = expression().xpath("/person[@name='James']").source("header:cheese").end();

// message 0 should not match, message 1 should match, message 2 should not match
mock.message(0).predicate(not(xpath));
mock.message(1).predicate(xpath);
mock.message(2).predicate(not(xpath));
----

Notice how we can create the expectation using the `expression()` fluent builder, that allows
you to use any of the many Camel languages, and to configure every option you may desire.

If you only need to use the expectation once, you can inline this directly in the mock as follows:

[source,java]
----
mock.message(1).predicate(expression().xpath("/person[@name='James']").source("header:cheese").end());
----

Notice that the xpath language need to use `source` to refer to the value should be from the header with key cheese.
By default, the source is the message body, and therefore is only needed when you refer to headers/variables etc.

To use any of the Camel languages then do as shown previously with the XPath example.

==== Using a custom inlined function

You can also use a custom `java.util.Function` as part of mock expectations. This allows you full power
to use Java programming to compute the returned value.

For example, you can write a custom function that takes an int as input and return the double value.
And then use this in mock as follows:

[source,java]
----
mock.message(0).header("num").expression(o -> {
    int num = (int) o;
    return num * 2;
}).isLessThan(10);
----

This example is a bit silly, and in a real use-case you would use custom functions
in advanced testing where you need to do some special coding based on business logic and data.

=== Mocking existing endpoints

Camel now allows you to automatically mock existing endpoints in your
Camel routes.

[NOTE]
*How it works* The endpoints are still in action. What happens differently
is that a xref:mock-component.adoc[Mock] endpoint is injected and receives the
message first and then delegates the message to the target endpoint. You
can view this as a kind of intercept and delegate or endpoint listener.

Suppose you have the given route below:

[source,java]
.*Route*
----
include::{examplesdir}/core/camel-core/src/test/java/org/apache/camel/processor/interceptor/AdviceWithMockEndpointsTest.java[tags=route]
----

You can then use the `adviceWith` feature in Camel to mock all the
endpoints in a given route from your unit test, as shown below:

[source,java]
.*`adviceWith` mocking all endpoints*
----
include::{examplesdir}/core/camel-core/src/test/java/org/apache/camel/processor/interceptor/AdviceWithMockEndpointsTest.java[tags=e1]
----

Notice that the mock endpoint is given the URI `mock:<endpoint>`, for
example `mock:direct:foo`. Camel logs at `INFO` level the endpoints
being mocked:

----
INFO  Adviced endpoint [direct://foo] with mock endpoint [mock:direct:foo]
----

[NOTE]
 **Mocked endpoints are without parameters** +
Endpoints which are mocked will have their parameters stripped off. For
example, the endpoint `log:foo?showAll=true` will be mocked to the
following endpoint `mock:log:foo`. Notice the parameters have been
removed.

It's also possible to only mock certain endpoints using a pattern. For
example to mock all `log` endpoints you do as shown:

[source,java]
.*`adviceWith` mocking only log endpoints using a pattern*
----
include::{examplesdir}/core/camel-core/src/test/java/org/apache/camel/processor/interceptor/AdviceWithMockEndpointsTest.java[tags=e2]
----

The pattern supported can be a wildcard or a regular expression. See
more details about this at Intercept as it is the
same matching function used by Camel.

[NOTE]
Mind that mocking endpoints causes the messages to be copied when they
arrive at the mock.
That means Camel will use more memory. This may not be suitable when you
send in a lot of messages.


=== Mocking existing endpoints using the `camel-test` component

Instead of using the `adviceWith` to instruct Camel to mock endpoints,
you can easily enable this behavior when using the `camel-test` Test
Kit.

The same route can be tested as follows. Notice that we return `"*"`
from the `isMockEndpoints` method, which tells Camel to mock all
endpoints.

If you only want to mock all `log` endpoints you can return `"log*"`
instead.

[source,java]
.*`isMockEndpoints` using camel-test kit*
----
include::{examplesdir}/components/camel-test/camel-test-junit5/src/test/java/org/apache/camel/test/junit5/patterns/IsMockEndpointsJUnit5Test.java[tags=e1]
----


=== Mocking existing endpoints with XML DSL

If you do not use the `camel-test` component for unit testing (as shown
above) you can use a different approach when using XML files for
routes.

The solution is to create a new XML file used by the unit test and then
include the intended XML file which has the route you want to test.

Suppose we have the route in the `camel-route.xml` file:

[source,xml]
.*camel-route.xml*
----
include::{examplesdir}/components/camel-spring-xml/src/test/resources/org/apache/camel/spring/mock/camel-route.xml[tags=e1]
----

Then we create a new XML file as follows, where we include the
`camel-route.xml` file and define a spring bean with the class
`org.apache.camel.impl.InterceptSendToMockEndpointStrategy` which tells
Camel to mock all endpoints:

[source,xml]
.*test-camel-route.xml*
----
include::{examplesdir}/components/camel-spring-xml/src/test/resources/org/apache/camel/spring/mock/InterceptSendToMockEndpointStrategyTest.xml[tags=e1]
----

Then in your unit test you load the new XML file
(`test-camel-route.xml`) instead of `camel-route.xml`.

To only mock all xref:log-component.adoc[Log] endpoints, you can define the pattern
in the constructor for the bean:

[source,xml]
----
<bean id="mockAllEndpoints" class="org.apache.camel.impl.InterceptSendToMockEndpointStrategy">
    <constructor-arg index="0" value="log*"/>
</bean>
----

=== Mocking endpoints and skip sending to original endpoint

Sometimes you want to easily mock and skip sending to certain
endpoints. So the message is detoured and send to the mock endpoint
only. You can now use the `mockEndpointsAndSkip`
method using AdviceWith. The example below will skip sending to the two endpoints
`"direct:foo"`, and `"direct:bar"`.

[source,java]
.*adviceWith mock and skip sending to endpoints*
----
include::{examplesdir}/core/camel-core/src/test/java/org/apache/camel/processor/interceptor/AdviceWithMockMultipleEndpointsWithSkipTest.java[tags=e1]
----

The same example using the Test Kit

[source,java]
.*isMockEndpointsAndSkip using camel-test kit*
----
include::{examplesdir}/components/camel-test/camel-test-junit5/src/test/java/org/apache/camel/test/junit5/patterns/IsMockEndpointsAndSkipJUnit5Test.java[tags=e1]
----

=== Limiting the number of messages to keep

The xref:mock-component.adoc[Mock] endpoints will by default keep a copy of every
Exchange that it received. So if you test with a lot
of messages, then it will consume memory. +
We have introduced two options `retainFirst` and
`retainLast` that can be used to specify to only keep Nth of the first
and/or last Exchanges.

For example, in the code below, we only want to retain a copy of the
first five and last five Exchanges the mock receives.

[source,java]
----
  MockEndpoint mock = getMockEndpoint("mock:data");
  mock.setRetainFirst(5);
  mock.setRetainLast(5);
  mock.expectedMessageCount(2000);

  mock.assertIsSatisfied();
----

Using this has some limitations. The `getExchanges()` and
`getReceivedExchanges()` methods on the `MockEndpoint` will return only
the retained copies of the Exchanges. So in the
example above, the list will contain 10 Exchanges;
the first five, and the last five. +
The `retainFirst` and `retainLast` options also have limitations on
which expectation methods you can use. For example, the `expectedXXX`
methods that work on message bodies, headers, etc. will only operate on
the retained messages. In the example above, they can test only the
expectations on the 10 retained messages.

=== Testing with arrival times

The xref:mock-component.adoc[Mock] endpoint stores the arrival time of the message
as a property on the Exchange.

[source,java]
----
Date time = exchange.getProperty(Exchange.RECEIVED_TIMESTAMP, Date.class);
----

You can use this information to know when the message arrived at the
mock. But it also provides foundation to know the time interval between
the previous and next message arrived at the mock. You can use this to
set expectations using the `arrives` DSL on the xref:mock-component.adoc[Mock]
endpoint.

For example, to say that the first message should arrive between 0 and 2
seconds before the next you can do:

[source,java]
----
mock.message(0).arrives().noLaterThan(2).seconds().beforeNext();
----

You can also define this as that second message (0 index based) should
arrive no later than 0 and 2 seconds after the previous:

[source,java]
----
mock.message(1).arrives().noLaterThan(2).seconds().afterPrevious();
----

You can also use between to set a lower bound. For example, suppose that
it should be between 1 and 4 seconds:

[source,java]
----
mock.message(1).arrives().between(1, 4).seconds().afterPrevious();
----

You can also set the expectation on all messages, for example, to say
that the gap between them should be at most 1 second:

[source,java]
----
mock.allMessages().arrives().noLaterThan(1).seconds().beforeNext();
----

[TIP]
====
*Time units* 

In the example above we use `seconds` as the time unit, but Camel offers
`milliseconds`, and `minutes` as well.
====



include::spring-boot:partial$starter.adoc[]
