components/camel-opentelemetry-metrics/src/main/docs/opentelemetry-metrics-component.adoc, before:

= OpenTelemetry Metrics Component
:doctitle: OpenTelemetry Metrics
:shortname: opentelemetry-metrics
:artifactid: camel-opentelemetry-metrics
:description: Camel metrics based on the Camel Telemetry spec
:since: 4.17
:supportlevel: Preview
:tabs-sync-option:
:component-header: Only producer is supported
//Manually maintained attributes
:camel-spring-boot-name: opentelemetry-metrics

*Since Camel {since}*

*{component-header}*

The OpenTelemetry Metrics component allows the collection of various metrics directly from Camel routes.
Supported metric types are xref:#OpenTelemetryComponent-counter[counter], xref:#OpenTelemetryComponent-summary[summary],
and xref:#OpenTelemetryComponent-timer[timer].

To get started, Maven users need to add the following dependency to their `pom.xml` for this component:

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.apache.camel</groupId>
    <artifactId>camel-opentelemetry-metrics</artifactId>
    <version>x.x.x</version>
    <!-- use the same version as your Camel core version -->
</dependency>
----

== URI format

----
opentelemetry-metrics:[ counter | summary | timer ]:metricname[?options]
----

// component-configure options: START

// component-configure options: END

// component options: START
include::partial$component-configure-options.adoc[]
include::partial$component-endpoint-options.adoc[]
// component options: END

// endpoint options: START

// endpoint options: END
// component headers: START
include::partial$component-endpoint-headers.adoc[]
// component headers: END

== Usage

[[OpenTelemetry-meter]]
=== Opetntelemetry Meter

OpenTelemetry meter configuration involves setting up a `MeterProvider` that is responsible for creating `Meter` instances.
These `Meters` are then used to create instruments like counters, gauges or histograms.

==== How it works
OpenTelemetry metrics are collected by instrumented application that record measurements using instruments like counters and gauges.
These measurements are then processed by an OpenTelemetry SDK, which aggregates and batches them before exporting them,
either directly or through the OpenTelemetry Collector. See https://opentelemetry.io/docs/languages/java/sdk/#sdkmeterprovider[SdkMeterProvider documentation]
for details on how to configure this.

=== Usage of producers

Each meter has a type and name. Supported types are xref:#OpenTelemetryComponent-counter[counter],
xref:#OpenTelemetryComponent-summary[distribution summary], and xref:#OpenTelemetryComponent-timer[timer].
If no type is provided, then a xref:#OpenTelemetryComponent-counter[counter], is used by default.

The meter name is a string that is evaluated as a `Simple` expression
and can also be overridden using the xref:#OpenTelemetryComponent-headers[`CamelMetricsName`] header allowing the selection of the meter that depends on the exchange data.

The optional `attributes` URI parameter is a comma-separated string consisting of `key=value` expressions.
Both `key` and `value` are strings that are evaluated as `Simple` expressions.

For example, the URI parameter `attributes.X=${header.Y}` would assign the current value of header `Y` to the key `X`.

[[OpenTelemetryComponent-headers]]
==== Headers

The meter name defined in the URI can be overridden by populating a header with name `CamelMetricsName`.
The meter attributes defined as URI parameters can be augmented by populating a header with name `CamelMetricsAttributes`.

For example

[source,java]
----
from("direct:in")
    .setHeader(OpenTelemetryConstants.HEADER_METRIC_NAME, constant("new.name"))
    .setHeader(OpenTelemetryConstants.HEADER_METRIC_ATTRIBUTES, constant(Attributes.of(AttributeKey.stringKey("dynamic-key"), "dynamic-value")))
    .to("opentelemetry-metrics:counter:name.not.used?attributes.key=value")
    .to("direct:out");
----

will update a counter with name `new.name` (instead of `name.not.used`) using the attribute `dynamic-key` with value `dynamic-value` in addition to the attribute `key` with value `value`.

All Metrics specific headers are removed from the message once the OpenTelemetry endpoint finishes processing the exchange. While processing the exchange
the OpenTelemetry endpoint will catch all exceptions and write log entry using level `warn`.

[[OpenTelemetryComponent-counter]]
=== Counter

----
opentelemetry-metrics:counter:name[?options]
----

==== Options

[width="100%",options="header"]
|=====================================================
|Name |Default |Description
|increment  |- |Long value to add to the counter
|decrement |- |Long value to subtract from the counter
|=====================================================

If neither `increment` or `decrement` is defined then value of the counter will be incremented by one.
If `increment` and `decrement` are both defined only the increment operation is called.

[source,java]
----
// update counter 'simple.counter' by 7
from("direct:in")
    .to("opentelemetry-metrics:counter:simple.counter?increment=7")
    .to("direct:out");
----

[source,java]
----
// increment counter 'simple.counter' by 1
from("direct:in")
    .to("opentelemetry-metrics:counter:simple.counter")
    .to("direct:out");
----

Both `increment` and `decrement` values are evaluated as `Simple` expressions with a Long result. For instance,
if header `X` contains a value that evaluates to `3`, the counter with name `simple.counter` is decremented by 3:

[source,java]
----
// decrement counter 'simple.counter' by 3
from("direct:in")
    .to("opentelemetry-metrics:counter:simple.counter?decrement=${header.X}")
    .to("direct:out");
----

==== Headers

Message headers can be used to override `increment` and `decrement` values specified in the OpenTelemetry endpoint URI.

[width="100%",cols="10%,80%,10%",options="header",]
|====================================================================
|Name |Description |Expected type
|CamelMetricsCounterIncrement  |Override increment value in URI |Long
|CamelMetricsCounterDecrement  |Override decrement value in URI |Long
|====================================================================

[source,java]
----
// update counter 'simple.counter' by 417
from("direct:in")
    .setHeader(OpenTelemetryConstants.HEADER_COUNTER_INCREMENT, constant(417))
    .to("opentelemetry-metrics:counter:simple.counter?increment=7")
    .to("direct:out");
----

[source,java]
----
// updates counter using simple language to evaluate 'body.length'
from("direct:in")
    .setHeader(OpenTelemetryConstants.HEADER_COUNTER_INCREMENT, simple("${body.length}"))
    .to("opentelemetry-metrics:counter:body.len")
    .to("direct:out");

----

[[OpenTelemetryComponent-summary]]
=== Distribution Summary

----
opentelemetry-metrics:summary:metricname[?options]
----

==== Options

[width="100%",options="header"]
|===================================
|Name |Default |Description
|value |- |Value to use in histogram
|===================================

If `value` is not set then nothing is added to histogram and warning is logged.

[source,java]
----
// adds value 9923 to 'simple.histogram'
from("direct:in")
    .to("opentelemetry-metrics:summary:simple.histogram?value=9923")
    .to("direct:out");
----

[source,java]
----
// nothing is added to 'simple.histogram', and a warning is logged
from("direct:in")
    .to("opentelemetry-metrics:summary:simple.histogram")
    .to("direct:out");

----

The histogram `value` is evaluated as a `Simple` expressions with a Long result. For example,
if header `X` contains a value that evaluates to `3`, and this value is registered with the `simple.histogram`:

[source,java]
----
from("direct:in")
    .to("opentelemetry-metrics:summary:simple.histogram?value=${header.X}")
    .to("direct:out");

----

==== Headers

A specific Message header can be used to override the value specified in the OpenTelemetry endpoint URI.

[width="100%",cols="10%,80%,10%",options="header",]
|=================================================================
|Name |Description |Expected type
|CamelMetricsHistogramValue |Override histogram value in URI |Long
|=================================================================

[source,java]
----
// adds value 992.0 to 'simple.histogram'
from("direct:in")
    .setHeader(OpenTelemetryConstants.HEADER_HISTOGRAM_VALUE, constant(992))
    .to("opentelemetry-metrics:summary:simple.histogram?value=700")
    .to("direct:out")

----

[[OpenTelemetryComponent-timer]]
=== Timer

----
opentelemetry-metrics:timer:metricname[?options]
----

==== Options

[width="100%",options="header"]
|==========================
|Name |Default |Description
|action |- |start or stop
|==========================

If no `action` or an invalid value is provided then a warning is logged without any timer update.

[source,java]
----
// measure time spent in route "direct:calculate"
from("direct:in")
    .to("opentelemetry-metrics:timer:simple.timer?action=start")
    .to("direct:calculate")
    .to("opentelemetry-metrics:timer:simple.timer?action=stop");
----

The timer `action` is evaluated as a `Simple` expression returning a result of type `OpenTelemetryTimerAction`.
`TimerTask` objects are stored as Exchange properties between different Metrics component calls.

==== Headers

A specific Message header can be used to override action value specified in the OpenTelemetry endpoint URI.

[width="100%",cols="10%,80%,10%",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Name |Description |Expected type
|CamelMetricsTimerAction |Override timer action in URI
|`org.apache.camel.component.opentelemetry.OpenTelemetryTimerAction`
|=======================================================================

[source,java]
----
// sets timer action using header
from("direct:in")
    .setHeader(OpenTelemetryConstants.HEADER_TIMER_ACTION, OpenTelemetryTimerAction.start)
    .to("opentelemetry-metrics:timer:simple.timer")
    .to("direct:out");
----

== OpenTelemetry Configuration

Applications can export collected metrics to various backends using different exporters, including the OpenTelemetry Protocol (OTLP) exporter,
which is widely supported by observability platforms.

[[OpenTelemetry-JavaAgent]]
=== Java Agent

Your application will require a Java agent in order to get the metrics generated by the Camel application.

Download the https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation/releases/[latest version].

This package includes the instrumentation agent as well as instrumentation for all supported libraries and all available data exporters. The package provides a completely automatic, out-of-the-box experience. Enable the instrumentation agent using the `-javaagent` flag to the JVM.

[source,bash]
----
java -javaagent:path/to/opentelemetry-javaagent.jar \
     -Dotel. ... \
     -jar myapp.jar
----

By default, the OpenTelemetry Java agent uses https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java/tree/main/exporters/otlp[OTLP exporter] configured to send data to https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/receiver/otlpreceiver/README.md[OpenTelemetry collector] at `http://localhost:4318`.

Configuration parameters are passed as Java system properties (`-D` flags) or as environment variables. See https://opentelemetry.io/docs/zero-code/java/agent/configuration/[the configuration documentation] for the full list of configuration items. For example:

[source,bash]
----
java -javaagent:path/to/opentelemetry-javaagent.jar \
     -Dotel.service.name=your-service-name \
     -Dotel.metrics.exporter=otlp \
     -jar myapp.jar
----

Commit message:

CAMEL-16866 add route event-notifier (#19867)

components/camel-opentelemetry-metrics/src/main/docs/opentelemetry-metrics-component.adoc, after:

= OpenTelemetry Metrics Component
:doctitle: OpenTelemetry Metrics
:shortname: opentelemetry-metrics
:artifactid: camel-opentelemetry-metrics
:description: Camel metrics based on the Camel Telemetry spec
:since: 4.17
:supportlevel: Preview
:tabs-sync-option:
:component-header: Only producer is supported
//Manually maintained attributes
:camel-spring-boot-name: opentelemetry-metrics

*Since Camel {since}*

*{component-header}*

The OpenTelemetry Metrics component allows the collection of various metrics directly from Camel routes.
Supported metric types are xref:#OpenTelemetryComponent-counter[counter], xref:#OpenTelemetryComponent-summary[summary],
and xref:#OpenTelemetryComponent-timer[timer].

To get started, Maven users need to add the following dependency to their `pom.xml` for this component:

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.apache.camel</groupId>
    <artifactId>camel-opentelemetry-metrics</artifactId>
    <version>x.x.x</version>
    <!-- use the same version as your Camel core version -->
</dependency>
----

== URI format

----
opentelemetry-metrics:[ counter | summary | timer ]:metricname[?options]
----

// component-configure options: START

// component-configure options: END

// component options: START
include::partial$component-configure-options.adoc[]
include::partial$component-endpoint-options.adoc[]
// component options: END

// endpoint options: START

// endpoint options: END
// component headers: START
include::partial$component-endpoint-headers.adoc[]
// component headers: END

== Usage

[[OpenTelemetry-meter]]
=== Opetntelemetry Meter

OpenTelemetry meter configuration involves setting up a `MeterProvider` that is responsible for creating `Meter` instances.
These `Meters` are then used to create instruments like counters, gauges or histograms.

==== How it works
OpenTelemetry metrics are collected by instrumented application that record measurements using instruments like counters and gauges.
These measurements are then processed by an OpenTelemetry SDK, which aggregates and batches them before exporting them,
either directly or through the OpenTelemetry Collector. See https://opentelemetry.io/docs/languages/java/sdk/#sdkmeterprovider[SdkMeterProvider documentation]
for details on how to configure this.

=== Usage of producers

Each meter has a type and name. Supported types are xref:#OpenTelemetryComponent-counter[counter],
xref:#OpenTelemetryComponent-summary[distribution summary], and xref:#OpenTelemetryComponent-timer[timer].
If no type is provided, then a xref:#OpenTelemetryComponent-counter[counter], is used by default.

The meter name is a string that is evaluated as a `Simple` expression
and can also be overridden using the xref:#OpenTelemetryComponent-headers[`CamelMetricsName`] header allowing the selection of the meter that depends on the exchange data.

The optional `attributes` URI parameter is a comma-separated string consisting of `key=value` expressions.
Both `key` and `value` are strings that are evaluated as `Simple` expressions.

For example, the URI parameter `attributes.X=${header.Y}` would assign the current value of header `Y` to the key `X`.

[[OpenTelemetryComponent-headers]]
==== Headers

The meter name defined in the URI can be overridden by populating a header with name `CamelMetricsName`.
The meter attributes defined as URI parameters can be augmented by populating a header with name `CamelMetricsAttributes`.

For example

[source,java]
----
from("direct:in")
    .setHeader(OpenTelemetryConstants.HEADER_METRIC_NAME, constant("new.name"))
    .setHeader(OpenTelemetryConstants.HEADER_METRIC_ATTRIBUTES, constant(Attributes.of(AttributeKey.stringKey("dynamic-key"), "dynamic-value")))
    .to("opentelemetry-metrics:counter:name.not.used?attributes.key=value")
    .to("direct:out");
----

will update a counter with name `new.name` (instead of `name.not.used`) using the attribute `dynamic-key` with value `dynamic-value` in addition to the attribute `key` with value `value`.

All Metrics specific headers are removed from the message once the OpenTelemetry endpoint finishes processing the exchange. While processing the exchange
the OpenTelemetry endpoint will catch all exceptions and write log entry using level `warn`.

[[OpenTelemetryComponent-counter]]
=== Counter

----
opentelemetry-metrics:counter:name[?options]
----

==== Options

[width="100%",options="header"]
|=====================================================
|Name |Default |Description
|increment  |- |Long value to add to the counter
|decrement |- |Long value to subtract from the counter
|=====================================================

If neither `increment` or `decrement` is defined then value of the counter will be incremented by one.
If `increment` and `decrement` are both defined only the increment operation is called.

[source,java]
----
// update counter 'simple.counter' by 7
from("direct:in")
    .to("opentelemetry-metrics:counter:simple.counter?increment=7")
    .to("direct:out");
----

[source,java]
----
// increment counter 'simple.counter' by 1
from("direct:in")
    .to("opentelemetry-metrics:counter:simple.counter")
    .to("direct:out");
----

Both `increment` and `decrement` values are evaluated as `Simple` expressions with a Long result. For instance,
if header `X` contains a value that evaluates to `3`, the counter with name `simple.counter` is decremented by 3:

[source,java]
----
// decrement counter 'simple.counter' by 3
from("direct:in")
    .to("opentelemetry-metrics:counter:simple.counter?decrement=${header.X}")
    .to("direct:out");
----

==== Headers

Message headers can be used to override `increment` and `decrement` values specified in the OpenTelemetry endpoint URI.

[width="100%",cols="10%,80%,10%",options="header",]
|====================================================================
|Name |Description |Expected type
|CamelMetricsCounterIncrement  |Override increment value in URI |Long
|CamelMetricsCounterDecrement  |Override decrement value in URI |Long
|====================================================================

[source,java]
----
// update counter 'simple.counter' by 417
from("direct:in")
    .setHeader(OpenTelemetryConstants.HEADER_COUNTER_INCREMENT, constant(417))
    .to("opentelemetry-metrics:counter:simple.counter?increment=7")
    .to("direct:out");
----

[source,java]
----
// updates counter using simple language to evaluate 'body.length'
from("direct:in")
    .setHeader(OpenTelemetryConstants.HEADER_COUNTER_INCREMENT, simple("${body.length}"))
    .to("opentelemetry-metrics:counter:body.len")
    .to("direct:out");

----

[[OpenTelemetryComponent-summary]]
=== Distribution Summary

----
opentelemetry-metrics:summary:metricname[?options]
----

==== Options

[width="100%",options="header"]
|===================================
|Name |Default |Description
|value |- |Value to use in histogram
|===================================

If `value` is not set then nothing is added to histogram and warning is logged.

[source,java]
----
// adds value 9923 to 'simple.histogram'
from("direct:in")
    .to("opentelemetry-metrics:summary:simple.histogram?value=9923")
    .to("direct:out");
----

[source,java]
----
// nothing is added to 'simple.histogram', and a warning is logged
from("direct:in")
    .to("opentelemetry-metrics:summary:simple.histogram")
    .to("direct:out");

----

The histogram `value` is evaluated as a `Simple` expressions with a Long result. For example,
if header `X` contains a value that evaluates to `3`, and this value is registered with the `simple.histogram`:

[source,java]
----
from("direct:in")
    .to("opentelemetry-metrics:summary:simple.histogram?value=${header.X}")
    .to("direct:out");

----

==== Headers

A specific Message header can be used to override the value specified in the OpenTelemetry endpoint URI.

[width="100%",cols="10%,80%,10%",options="header",]
|=================================================================
|Name |Description |Expected type
|CamelMetricsHistogramValue |Override histogram value in URI |Long
|=================================================================

[source,java]
----
// adds value 992.0 to 'simple.histogram'
from("direct:in")
    .setHeader(OpenTelemetryConstants.HEADER_HISTOGRAM_VALUE, constant(992))
    .to("opentelemetry-metrics:summary:simple.histogram?value=700")
    .to("direct:out")

----

[[OpenTelemetryComponent-timer]]
=== Timer

----
opentelemetry-metrics:timer:metricname[?options]
----

==== Options

[width="100%",options="header"]
|==========================
|Name |Default |Description
|action |- |start or stop
|==========================

If no `action` or an invalid value is provided then a warning is logged without any timer update.

[source,java]
----
// measure time spent in route "direct:calculate"
from("direct:in")
    .to("opentelemetry-metrics:timer:simple.timer?action=start")
    .to("direct:calculate")
    .to("opentelemetry-metrics:timer:simple.timer?action=stop");
----

The timer `action` is evaluated as a `Simple` expression returning a result of type `OpenTelemetryTimerAction`.
`TimerTask` objects are stored as Exchange properties between different Metrics component calls.

==== Headers

A specific Message header can be used to override action value specified in the OpenTelemetry endpoint URI.

[width="100%",cols="10%,80%,10%",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Name |Description |Expected type
|CamelMetricsTimerAction |Override timer action in URI
|`org.apache.camel.component.opentelemetry.OpenTelemetryTimerAction`
|=======================================================================

[source,java]
----
// sets timer action using header
from("direct:in")
    .setHeader(OpenTelemetryConstants.HEADER_TIMER_ACTION, OpenTelemetryTimerAction.start)
    .to("opentelemetry-metrics:timer:simple.timer")
    .to("direct:out");
----

=== OpenTelemetry Event Notification

==== Camel Route Event Notifier

The Route Event Notifier counts the number of added and running routes, and can be added to the CamelContext as follows:

[source,java]
----
camelContext.getManagementStrategy().addEventNotifier(new OpenTelemetryRouteEventNotifier());
----

Camel specific metrics that are available:

[width="100%",options="header"]
|=====================================================
|Default Name |Type |Description
|camel.routes.added | LongUpDownCounter | Number of routes in total
|camel.routes.reloaded | LongCounter | Number of routes that have been reloaded
|camel.routes.running | LongUpDownCounter | Number of routes currently running
|=====================================================

The following options are supported:

[width="100%",options="header"]
|=======================================================================
|Name |Default |Description
| namingStrategy | OpenTelemetryRouteEventNotifierNamingStrategy.DEFAULT | The strategy to use for overriding default metric names.
|=======================================================================

== OpenTelemetry Configuration

Applications can export collected metrics to various backends using different exporters, including the OpenTelemetry Protocol (OTLP) exporter,
which is widely supported by observability platforms.

[[OpenTelemetry-JavaAgent]]
=== Java Agent

Your application will require a Java agent in order to get the metrics generated by the Camel application.

Download the https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation/releases/[latest version].

This package includes the instrumentation agent as well as instrumentation for all supported libraries and all available data exporters. The package provides a completely automatic, out-of-the-box experience. Enable the instrumentation agent using the `-javaagent` flag to the JVM.

[source,bash]
----
java -javaagent:path/to/opentelemetry-javaagent.jar \
     -Dotel. ... \
     -jar myapp.jar
----

By default, the OpenTelemetry Java agent uses https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java/tree/main/exporters/otlp[OTLP exporter] configured to send data to https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/receiver/otlpreceiver/README.md[OpenTelemetry collector] at `http://localhost:4318`.

Configuration parameters are passed as Java system properties (`-D` flags) or as environment variables. See https://opentelemetry.io/docs/zero-code/java/agent/configuration/[the configuration documentation] for the full list of configuration items. For example:

[source,bash]
----
java -javaagent:path/to/opentelemetry-javaagent.jar \
     -Dotel.service.name=your-service-name \
     -Dotel.metrics.exporter=otlp \
     -jar myapp.jar
----
